PROMETHEUS

There once lived a race of huge giants called Titans. These giants were fierce, turbulent, and lawless— always fighting among themselves and against Jupiter,
the king of the gods.
One of the Titans, whose name was Prometheus, was wiser than the rest. He often thought about what would be likely to happen in the future.
One day, Prometheus said to his brother Titans: “What is the use of wasting so much strength? In the end, wisdom and forethought will win. If we are going to fight against the gods, let us choose a leader and stop
quarrelling among ourselves.”
The Titans answered him by a shower of great rocks and uprooted trees.
Prometheus, after escaping unhurt, said to his younger brother: “Come, Epimetheus, we can do nothing among these Titans. If they keep on, they will tear the earth to pieces. Let us go and help Jupiter to overcome them.”
Epimetheus agreed to this, and the two brothers went over to Jupiter, who called the gods together and began a terrible battle. The Titans tore up enormous boulders and cast them at the gods, while Jupiter hurled his thunderbolts and his lightnings in all directions.
Soon the sky was a sheet of flame, the sea boiled, the earth trembled, and the forests took fire and began to burn.
At last the gods—partly by the help of the wise counsel of Prometheus—conquered the Titans, took them to the ends of the earth, and imprisoned them in a deep underground cavern. Neptune, the sea-god, made strong bronze gates with heavy bolts and bars, to keep the giants down, while Jupiter sent Briareus and his brothers, three giants with fifty heads and a hundred hands each, to stand guard over them.
All but one of the Titans who had fought against the gods were imprisoned in this cavern. This one who was not shut in with the others was Atlas, whose enormous strength was greater than that of his brothers, while his disposition was less quarrelsome. He was made to stand and hold up the sky on his head and hands.
As the Titans could now make no more trouble, there was comparative peace and quiet on the earth. Nevertheless, Jupiter said that, although the men who remained on the earth were not so strong as the Titans, they were a foolish and wicked race. He declared that he would destroy them—sweep them away, and have done with them, forever.
When their king said this, none of the gods dared to say a word in defence of mankind. But Prometheus, the Titan, who was earth-born himself, and loved these men of the earth, begged Jupiter so earnestly to spare them, that Jupiter consented to do so.
At this time, men lived in dark, gloomy caves.
Their friend, Prometheus, taught them to build simple houses, which were much more comfortable than the caves had been. This was a great step forward, but men needed more help yet from the Titan. The beasts in the forests, and the great birds that built their nests on the rocks, were strong; but men were weak. The lion had sharp claws and teeth; the eagle had wings; the turtle had a hard shell; but man, although he stood upright with his face toward the stars, had no weapon with which he could defend himself.
Prometheus said that man should have Jupiter’s wonderful flower of fire, which shone so brightly in the sky. So he took a hollow reed, went up to Olympus, stole the red flower of fire, and brought it down to earth in his reed.
After this, all the other creatures were afraid of man, for this red flower had made him stronger than they. Man dug iron out of the earth, and by the help of his new fire made weapons that were sharper than the lion’s teeth; he tamed the wild cattle by the fear of it, yoked them together, and taught them how to draw the plough; he sharpened strong stakes, hardening them in its heat, and set them around his house as a defence from his enemies; he did many other things besides with the red flower that Prometheus had made to blossom at the end of the reed.
Jupiter, sitting on his throne, saw with alarm how strong man was becoming. One day he discovered the theft of his shining red flower, and knew that Prometheus was the thief. He was greatly displeased at this act.
“Prometheus loves man too well,” said he. “He shall be punished.” Then he called his two slaves, Strength and Force, and told them to take Prometheus and bind him fast to a great rock in the lonely Caucasian Mountains. At the same time he ordered Vulcan, the lame smith-god, to rivet the Titan’s chains—in a cunning way that only Vulcan knew.
There Prometheus hung on the rock for hundreds of years. The sun shone on him pitilessly, by day—only the kindly night gave him shade. He heard the rushing wings of the sea-gulls, as they came to feed their young who cried from the rocks below. The sea-nymphs floated up to his rock to give him their pity. A vulture, cruel as the king of the gods, came daily and tore him with its claws and beak.
But this frightful punishment did not last forever. Prometheus himself knew that some day he should be set free, and this knowledge made him strong to endure.
At last the time came when Jupiter’s throne was in danger, and Prometheus, pitying his enemy, told him a secret which helped him to make everything safe again. After this, Jupiter sent Hercules to shoot the vulture and to break the Titan’s chains. So Prometheus was set free.


HOW TROUBLES CAME INTO THE WORLD

A very long time ago, in the Golden Age, every one was good and happy. It was always spring; the earth was covered with flowers, and only gentle winds blew to set the flowers dancing.
No one had any work to do. People lived on mountain strawberries, which were always to be had for the gathering, and on wild grapes, blackberries, and sweet acorns, which grew plentifully in the oak forests. Rivers flowed with milk and nectar. Even the bees did not need to lay up honey, for it fell in tiny drops from the trees. There was abundance everywhere.
In all the whole world, there was not a sword, nor any weapon by means of which men might fight with one another. No one had ever heard of any such thing. All the iron and the gold were buried deep underground.
Besides, people were never ill; they had no troubles of any kind; and never grew old.
The two brothers, Prometheus and Epimetheus, lived in those wonderful days. After stealing the fire for man, Prometheus, knowing that Jupiter would be angry, decided to go away for a time on a distant journey; but before he went, he warned Epimetheus not to receive any gifts from the gods.
One day, after Prometheus had been gone for some time, Mercury came to the cottage of Epimetheus, leading by the hand a beautiful young woman, whose name was Pandora. She had a wreath of partly opened rosebuds on her head, a number of delicate gold chains twisted lightly around her neck, and wore a filmy veil which fell nearly to the hem of her tunic. Mercury presented her to Epimetheus, saying the gods had sent this gift that he might not be lonesome.
Pandora had such a lovely face that Epimetheus could not help believing that the gods had sent her to him in good faith. So he paid no heed to the warning of Prometheus, but took Pandora into his cottage, and found that the days passed much more quickly and pleasantly when she was with him.
Soon, the gods sent Epimetheus another gift. This was a heavy box, which the satyrs brought to the
cottage, with directions that it was not to be opened. Epimetheus let it stand in a corner of his cottage; for by this time he had begun to think that the caution of Prometheus about receiving gifts from the gods was altogether unnecessary.
Often, Epimetheus was away all day, hunting or fishing or gathering grapes from the wild vines that grew along the river banks. On such days, Pandora had nothing to do but to wonder what was in the mysterious box. One day her curiosity was so great that she lifted the lid a very little way and peeped in. The result was similar to what would have happened had she lifted the cover of a beehive. Out rushed a great swarm of little winged creatures, and before Pandora knew what had happened, she was stung. She dropped the lid and ran out of the cottage, screaming. Epimetheus, who was just coming in at the door, was well stung, too.

The little winged creatures that Pandora had let out of the box were Troubles, the first that had ever been seen in the world. They soon flew about and spread themselves everywhere, pinching and stinging whenever they got the chance.
After this, people began to have headaches, rheumatism, and other illnesses; and instead of being always kind and pleasant to one another, as they had been before the Troubles were let out of the box, they became unfriendly and quarrelsome. They began to grow old, too.
Nor was it always spring any longer. The fresh young grasses that had clothed all the hillsides, and the gay-colored flowers that had given Epimetheus and Pandora so much pleasure, were scorched by hot
summer suns, and bitten by the frosts of autumn. Oh, it was a sad thing for the world, when all those wicked little Troubles were let loose!
All the Troubles escaped from the box, but when Pandora let the lid fall so hastily, she shut in one little winged creature, a kind of good fairy whose name was Hope. This little Hope persuaded Pandora to let her out. As soon as she was free, she flew about in the world, undoing all the evil that the Troubles had done, that is, as fast as one good fairy could undo the evil work of such a swarm. No matter what evil thing had happened to poor mortals, she always found some way to comfort them. She fanned aching heads with her gossamer wings; she brought back the color to pale cheeks; and best of all, she whispered to those who were growing old that they should one day be young again.
So this is the way that Troubles came into the world, but we must not forget that Hope came with them.


THE GREAT DELUGE

After the Golden Age there came a time when men began to quarrel with one another. Then the gods sent hot summers and cold winters. Men made themselves places in which to live, in caves and grottos, where they might be protected from the hot sun in summer, and from cold winds in winter. They ploughed the ground and grew grain, which they laid away for food during the cold season.
As the world grew older, men became more and more quarrelsome. At last they dug gold out of the ground, where it had lain for so long a time; and they dug out iron too. They quarrelled more sadly than ever over the possession of the bright yellow gold they had found; and, what was worst of all, they made sharp knives and other weapons out of iron, and fought fiercely with each other.
After this, robbery, murder, and many other crimes were common on the earth. Things grew worse and worse, till a man’s life was not safe anywhere. Finally, in all the whole world there were only two people who continued to sacrifice to the gods. These two were Deucalion and Pyrrha, who were good and gentle, like the people who had lived in the Golden Age.
Jupiter, the father of the gods, looking down from Mount Olympus and seeing how wicked the people of the earth had grown, made up his mind that he would destroy them all. So he shut up the North Wind in the caves of Æolus, and sent forth the South Wind, for the South Wind was the wind that would bring the rain.
Clouds gathered over all the earth, and great drops of rain began to fall, slowly at first, then faster and faster. It rained till the grain was laid flat in the fields, still the clouds did not lighten, nor the rain cease falling. The rivers overflowed their banks, and rushed in over the plains, uprooting great trees, and carrying away houses and cattle and men. The sea, as well as the rivers, flowed in over the land, till dolphins played among the branches of forest trees. Sea-nymphs, too, might have been seen peeping out from among great oaks. Still the rain never stopped, and the water rose higher and higher.
Men and animals made their way to the hills as well as they could, wolves, lions, and tigers swimming side by side with sheep or cattle, all in one common danger. They made their way first to the hills and then to the mountains, but the water came creeping up, up, till all but the tops of the highest mountains were out of sight. At last, when the rain stopped, and the clouds broke away a little, only the top of Mount Parnassus, which was the highest mountain of all, remained above water.
Deucalion and Pyrrha were sailing in a little ship, which they had managed to keep afloat. When they saw that the top of Mount Parnassus was still out of water, they anchored their ship there, and sacrificed to the gods.
Now, as you know, Deucalion and Pyrrha had not become wicked like the rest of mankind. When Jupiter saw that only these two were left, he sent out the North Wind to blow away the clouds. Then Neptune, the god of the sea, sent his chief Triton, to blow a long, twisted horn, and the sea heard, and went back to the place where it rightfully belonged.
As the waters rapidly fell away, the earth appeared again, but what a change! Everything was covered with a dismal coating of yellow mud. And it was so very still—not a sound from any living thing! Deucalion and Pyrrha felt as if even the sound of quarrelling would be better than such perfect silence.
Near by, with its fires out, and covered with mud, was the temple of one of the gods. Deucalion and Pyrrha felt a sense of companionship in its familiar porch, so they went and sat there in the shade, wondering what would become of them—they two, alone in such a great world.
Then a mysterious voice told them to throw the bones of their great mother behind them. It sounded like a friendly voice, but neither Deucalion nor Pyrrha could imagine what was meant by “the bones of their great mother.” After they had puzzled over it for some time, they came to the conclusion that their “great mother” must mean Mother Earth, and that her “bones” must be the stones that lay around them. So, standing with their faces toward the temple, they threw the stones behind them. When they turned to see what had happened, they found that the stones which they had thrown had changed into men and women.
In this way, after the Great Deluge, the earth was peopled again; but it is to be feared that some of the people of this new race had hearts as hard as the stones from which they were made.


APOLLO AND DAPHNE

One day Cupid, the little god of love, sat on the bank of a river, playing with his arrows. The arrows were very tiny. Some had points of gold, and others had points of lead. None of them looked as if they could do much harm.
That day Apollo, the great sun-god, walked along the bank of the same river, when returning from his fight with the serpent of darkness, called the Python. He had just used a great number of his wonderful golden arrows in killing this gigantic serpent. Feeling very proud of his victory over the Python, he said, when he saw Cupid at his play, “Ho! What are such little arrows as these good for?” Cupid’s feelings were very much hurt at this. He said nothing, but he took his little arrows and flew to the top of Mount Parnassus.
There he sat down on the grass and took a leaden- pointed arrow from his quiver. Looking all about him for some mark for his arrow, he saw Daphne walking through a grove. Daphne was the daughter of Peneus, the river-god. She was so beautiful that the sleeping flowers lifted their heads and burst into full bloom at her coming. Cupid shot the leaden-pointed arrow straight at Daphne’s heart. Although it did her no other harm, this little blunt arrow made Daphne feel afraid, and without knowing what she was running away from, she began to run.
Then Cupid, who was very naughty, took a golden-pointed arrow from his quiver, and with this wounded Apollo. The golden-pointed arrow had the power to make Apollo love the first thing he saw. This chanced to be Daphne, the river-nymph, who came running by just then, with her golden hair floating out behind her.
Apollo called to Daphne that there was nothing to fear; then, as she would not stop running, he ran after her. The faster Apollo followed the faster Daphne ran, and she grew more and more afraid all the time, for the little leaden-pointed arrow was sticking in her heart.
She ran till she came to the bank of her father’s river, and by this time she was so tired that she could run no farther. She called on her father for help. The river-god heard, and before Apollo could overtake her, changed her into a tree, a beautiful tree with glossy evergreen leaves and blossoms as pink as Daphne’s own cheeks.
When Apollo came up with Daphne, there she stood, on the bank of the river, not a nymph any longer, but a beautiful tree. Apollo was broken-hearted, at first, to see how he had lost Daphne. It was all the fault of the little golden-pointed arrow. Since this tree was all that was left of Daphne, Apollo loved the tree, and said that it should be planted by the side of his temple. He made himself a crown from its evergreen leaves, which he always wore for Daphne’s sake. This tree still grows in Greece, and is called the Laurel of Apollo.


HOW APOLLO GOT HIS LYRE

Mercury was the child of Maia, the eldest of the Pleiades, and lived with his mother in a cave among the mountains. One day, when he was only just big enough to walk, he ran out of doors to play in the sunshine, and saw a spotted tortoise-shell lying in the grass. He laughed with pleasure at sight of the pretty thing, and quickly carried it into the cave. Then he bored holes in the edge of the shell, fastened hollow reeds inside, and with a piece of leather and strings made a lyre of it. This was the first lyre that was ever made, and most wonderful music lay hidden in it.
That night, when his mother was asleep, Mercury crept slyly out of his cradle and went out into the moonlight; he ran to the pastures where Apollo’s white cattle were sleeping, and stole fifty of the finest heifers.
Then he threw his baby-shoes into the ocean, and bound great limbs of tamarisk to his feet, so that no one would be able to tell who had been walking in the soft sand. After this, he drove the cattle hither and thither in great glee for a while, and then took them down the mountain and shut them into a cave—but one would think from the tracks left in the sand that the cattle had been driven up, instead of down the mountain.
A peasant, who was hoeing in his vineyard by the light of the full moon, saw this wonderful baby pass by, driving the cattle, and could hardly believe his own eyes. No one else saw Mercury; and just at sunrise, the little mischief went home to his mother’s cave, slipped in through the keyhole, and in a twinkling was in his cradle with his tortoise-shell lyre held tightly in his arms, looking as if he had been sleeping there all night.
Apollo soon missed his cattle. It happened that the man who had been hoeing his grape-vines by moonlight was still working in the same field. When
Apollo asked him whether he had seen any one driving cattle over that road, the man described the baby that he had seen, with the curious shoes, and told him how it had driven the cattle backward and forward, and up and down.
By daylight, the road looked as if the wind had been playing havoc with the young evergreens. Their twigs were scattered here and there, and great branches seemed to have been broken off and blown about in the sand. There were no tracks of any living thing, except the tracks of the cattle, which led in all directions. This was very confusing, but Apollo, knowing that no baby, except his own baby brother, could drive cattle, went straight to Maia’s cave.
There lay Mercury in his cradle, fast asleep. When Apollo accused him of stealing his white cattle, he sat up and rubbed his eyes, and said innocently that he did not know what cattle were; he had just heard the word for the first time. But Apollo was angry, and insisted that the baby should go with him to Jupiter, to have the dispute settled.
When the two brothers came before Jupiter’s throne, Mercury kept on saying that he had never seen any cattle and did not know what they were; but as he said so, he gave Jupiter such a roguish wink that he made the god laugh heartily. Then he suddenly caught up his lyre, and began to play. The music was so beautiful that all the gods in Olympus held their breath to listen. Even Jupiter’s fierce eagle nodded his head to the measures.
When Mercury stopped playing, Apollo declared that such music was well worth the fifty cattle, and agreed to say no more about the theft. This so pleased Mercury that he gave Apollo the lyre.
Then Apollo, in return for the gift of the wonderful lyre, gave Mercury a golden wand, called the caduceus, which had power over sleep and dreams, and wealth and happiness. At a later time two wings fluttered from the top of this wand, and two golden snakes were twined round it. Besides presenting Mercury with the caduceus, Apollo made him herdsman of the wonderful white cattle. Mercury now drove the fifty heifers back to their pastures. So the quarrel was made up, and the two brothers, Apollo and Mercury, became the best of friends.
On a day when the wind is blowing and driving fleecy white clouds before it, perhaps, if you look up, you will see the white cattle of Apollo. But you will have to look very sharp to see the herdsman, Mercury.


MERCURY AND ARGUS

Argus was a watchman with a hundred eyes, set in a circle all around his head. When he slept, he closed only two eyes at a time; the other ninety-eight were always wide open. So it could not have been easy to steal away anything that Argus was watching.
Now it happened that Juno, the wife of Jupiter, was very jealous of a beautiful river-nymph, called Io. Jupiter, in order to save Io from the jealous anger of Juno, changed her into a white heifer. Juno, suspecting that the white heifer was really Io, set Argus with his hundred eyes to watch her.
Poor Io was very unhappy. Her father, the river- god, did not know her, neither did her sister-nymphs; but they used to pat the white heifer and feed it grass from their hands. At last Io wrote her name with her hoof in the sands of the river bank, and then her father and sisters knew that the pretty white heifer was their own Io.
She had no sooner revealed herself to her family in this way than Argus drove her away to a field that lay far back from the river, where the river-god and the nymphs could not come, and then set himself down on the top of a high hill, meaning to watch her more closely than ever.
Jupiter felt sorry for Io, still he did not dare change her back into her natural form while Argus was watching her. But remembering how Mercury, when he was less than a day old, had stolen away the cattle of
Apollo, he now set this prince of thieves, this mischief- loving Mercury, to steal Io away from Argus.
Mercury thought there could be no better fun. He laid aside his winged cap and his winged shoes, and dressed like the shepherds in that country. He carried his golden wand, the caduceus, in his hand, and as he walked along, played carelessly on a shepherd’s pipe; then, finding a few goats feeding at the side of the road, he drove them slowly before him.
Argus found his watch rather tiresome, and was glad enough to talk to any one who happened to pass by. He was very glad when he saw Mercury coming with the goats, and he invited the pretended shepherd to come and sit by him, under the trees in the shade, and play on his pipe and tell stories.
Mercury sat down on a stone by the side of Argus, and began to play—very softly, so softly that the music was like the sighing of the wind through the branches of the trees. The day was warm, and there was
no other sound except the shrill singing of the cicadas. Two of Argus’s eyes soon closed. The others might have remained open if there had not been a drowsy magic in Mercury’s piping. The soft notes came soothingly, slower and slower, and one after another Argus’s other eyes began to close, till only two remained open. These two eyes were very bright; they fairly twinkled, and they kept their watch on Io through all Mercury’s playing. Then Mercury began to tell stories, and at last the two twinkling eyes closed, like the others. Argus, with all his hundred eyes, was fast asleep. To make him sleep more heavily, Mercury just touched him lightly with the dream-giving caduceus, and then he triumphantly led Io away.
Juno was very angry when she found that her wonderful watchman had slept at his post, slept with all his eyes at once. She said he did not deserve to have so many eyes, if he could not keep some of them open. So she took all of his hundred eyes away from him, and set them in the tail of her pet peacock, who was very proud to wear them. Ever since that day all peacocks have had eyes in their tails.


CERES AND PROSERPINE

In the island of Sicily, high up among the mountains, there was once a beautiful valley, called the valley of Enna. It was seldom that a human being, even a shepherd, climbed so high; but the goats, being able to climb by the steepest and most slippery paths, over the roughest rocks, knew well what soft, sweet grass grew there. Sheep, too, and sometimes wild swine, found their way to this spot.
Not another mountain valley anywhere was quite like this one. It was never visited by any of the winds except Zephyrus, who was always mild and gentle. The grass was always green and the flowers were always in bloom. There were shady groves on every side, and numberless fountains of sparkling water. It would have been hard to find a pleasanter spot.
This valley of Enna was the home of Ceres, the Earth-mother, one of the wisest of the goddesses. In fact, the valley owed its beauty to the presence of Ceres, and the wonderful vegetation which covered the whole island of Sicily was due to her influence; for she was the goddess of all that grows out of the earth, and knew the secret of the springing wheat and the ripening fruits. She watched over the flowers, the lambs in the fields, and the young children. The springs of water, too, which came from hidden places of the earth, were hers.
One day Proserpine, the little daughter of Ceres, was playing in the meadows of Enna. Her hair was as yellow as gold, and her cheeks had the delicate pink of an apple blossom. She seemed like a flower among the other flowers of the valley.
She, and the daughters of the valley-nymphs, who were children of about her own age, had taken off their sandals and were running about on the soft grass in their bare feet. They were as light-hearted as the little lambs and kids. Soon they began to gather the flowers that grew so thick on every side—violets, hyacinths, lilies, and big purple irises. They filled their baskets, and then their dresses, and twisted long sprays of wild roses around their shoulders.
Suddenly, Proserpine saw a flower which made her forget everything else. This flower seemed to be a strange, new kind of narcissus. It was of gigantic size, and its one flower-stalk held at least a hundred blossoms. Its fragrance was so powerful that it filled the entire island, and might be noticed even out at sea.
Proserpine called to her playmates to come and see this wonderful flower, and then she noticed, for the first time, that she was alone; for she had wandered from one flower to another till she had left the other children far behind. Running quickly forward to pick this strange blossom, she saw that its stalk was spotted like a snake, and feared that it might be poisonous. Still, it was far too beautiful a flower to be left by itself in the meadow, and she therefore tried to pluck it. When she found that she could not break the stalk, she made a great effort to pull the whole plant up by the roots.
All at once, the black soil around the plant loosened, and Proserpine heard a rumbling underneath the ground. Then the earth suddenly opened, a great black cavern appeared, and out from its depths sprang four magnificent black horses, drawing a golden chariot. In the chariot sat a king with a crown on his head, but under the crown was the gloomiest face ever seen.
When this strange king saw Proserpine standing there by the flower, too frightened to run away, he checked his horses for an instant and, bending forward, snatched the poor child from the ground and placed her on the seat by his side. Then he whipped up his horses and drove away at a furious rate.
Proserpine, still holding fast to her flowers, screamed for her mother.
Helios, the sun-god, saw how the gloomy-faced king had stolen Proserpine away, and Hecate, who sat near by in her cave, heard the scream and the sound of wheels. No one else had any suspicion of what had happened.
Ceres was far away across the seas in another country, overlooking the gathering in of the harvests. She heard Proserpine’s scream, and like a sea-bird when it hears the distressed cry of its young, came rushing home across the water.
She filled the valley with the sound of her calling, but no one answered to the name of Proserpine. The strange flower had disappeared. A few roses lay
scattered on the grass, and near them were a child’s footprints. Ceres felt sure that these were the traces of Proserpine’s little bare feet, but she could not follow them far, because a herd of swine had wandered that way and left a confusion of hoofprints behind them.
Ceres could learn nothing about her daughter from the nymphs. She sent out her own messenger, the big white crane that brings the rain; but although he could fly very swiftly and very far on his strong wings, he brought back no news of Proserpine.
When it grew dark, the goddess lighted two torches at the flaming summit of Mount Ætna, and continued her search. She wandered up and down for nine days and nine nights. On the tenth night, when it was nearly morning, she met Hecate, who was carrying a light in her hand, as if she, too, were looking for something. Hecate told Ceres how she had heard Proserpine scream, and had heard the sound of wheels, but had seen nothing. Then she went with the goddess to ask Helios, the sun-god, whether he had not seen what happened that day, for the sun-god travels around the whole world, and must see everything.
Ceres found Helios sitting in his chariot, ready to drive his horses across the sky. He held the fiery creatures in for a moment, while he told Ceres that Pluto, the king of the underworld, had stolen her daughter and had carried her away to live with him in his dark palace.
When Ceres heard this, she knew that Proserpine was lost to her, and she kept away from the other gods and hid herself in the dark places of the earth. She liked to keep away from the earth’s people as well as from the gods, for wherever she went, she was sure to see some happy mother with her children around her, and the sight made her feel very lonely. She sometimes envied the poorest peasants, or even the little bird-mothers in the trees.
One day she sat down by the side of the road, near a well, in the shade of an olive tree. While she was sitting there, the four daughters of Celeus, carrying golden pitchers on their shoulders, came down from their father’s palace to draw water. Seeing a sad old woman sitting by the well, they spoke to her in a kindly way. Not wishing them to know that she was a goddess, Ceres told the four young princesses that she had been carried away from her home by pirates, and had escaped from being sold for a slave by running away the instant that the pirate’s ship reached the shore.
“I am old, and a stranger to every one here,” she said, “but I am not too old to work for my bread. I could keep house, or take care of a young child.”
Hearing this, the four sisters ran eagerly back to the palace, and asked permission to bring the strange woman home with them. Their mother told them that they might engage her as nurse for their little brother, Demophoon.
Therefore Ceres became an inmate of the house of Celeus, and the little Demophoon flourished wonderfully under her care.
Ceres soon learned to love the human baby who was her charge, and she wished to make him immortal. She knew only one way of doing this, and that was to bathe him with ambrosia, and then, one night after another, place him in the fire until his mortal parts should be burned away. Every night she did this, without saying a word to any one. Under this treatment Demophoon was growing wonderfully godlike; but one night, his mother being awake very late, and hearing some one moving about, drew the curtains aside a very little, and peeped out. There, before the fire-place, where a great fire was burning, stood the strange nurse, with Demophoon in her arms. The mother watched in silence until she saw Ceres place the child in the fire, then she gave a shriek of alarm.
The shriek broke the spell. Ceres took Demophoon from the fire and laid him on the floor. Then she told the trembling mother that she had meant to make her child immortal, but that now this could not be. He would have to grow old and die like other mortals. Then, throwing off her blue hood, she suddenly lost her aged appearance, and all at once looked very grand and beautiful. Her hair, which fell down over her shoulders, was yellow, like the ripe grain in the fields. Demophoon’s mother knew by these signs that her child’s nurse must be the great Ceres, but she saw her no more, for the goddess went out into the dark night.
After this Ceres continued her lonely wandering, not caring where she went. One day, as she stooped to drink from a spring, Abas, a freckled boy who stood near, mocked her because she looked sad and old. Suddenly he saw Ceres stand up very straight, with a look that frightened him. Then he felt himself growing smaller and smaller, until he shrunk into a little speckled water- newt, when he made haste to hide himself away under a stone.
Unlike Abas, most of the people whom Ceres met with felt sorry for her. One day, while she was sitting on a stone by the side of a mountain road in Greece, feeling very sorrowful, she heard a childish voice say,
“Mother, are you not afraid to stay all alone here on the mountain?”
Ceres looked up, pleased to hear the word “mother,” and saw a little peasant girl, standing near
two goats that she had driven down from the mountain- pastures.
“No, my child,” said she, “I am not afraid.”
Just then, out from among the trees came the little girl’s father, carrying a bundle of firewood on his shoulder. He invited Ceres to come to his cottage for the night. Ceres at first refused, but finally accepted the invitation.
“You are happier than I,” said Ceres, as the three walked toward the cottage. “You have your little daughter with you, but I have lost mine.”
“Alas! I have sorrow enough,” said the peasant. “I fear that my only son, little Triptolemus, lies dying
at home.”
“Let us hope that he may yet be cured,” said Ceres, and stooping, she gathered a handful of poppies.
Soon they came into the little cottage, where they found the mother beside herself with grief for her boy.
Ceres bent over the child and kissed him softly on both cheeks. As she did so, the poppies in her hands brushed lightly against his face. Then his groans ceased, and the child fell into a quiet sleep.
In the morning Triptolemus woke strong and well; and when Ceres called her winged dragons and drove away through the clouds, she left a happy and grateful family behind her.
All this time, while Ceres had been mourning for her lost Proserpine, she had neglected to look after the little seeds that lay in the brown earth. The consequence was that these little seeds could not sprout and grow; therefore there was no grain to be ground into flour for bread. Not only the seeds, but all growing things missed the care of Mother Ceres. The grass turned brown and withered away, the trees in the olive orchards dropped their leaves, and the little birds all flew away to a distant country. Even the sheep that fed among the water- springs in the valley of Enna grew so thin that it was pitiful to see them.
Jupiter saw that without Ceres, the Great Mother, there could be no life on the earth. In time, all men and animals would die for lack of food. He therefore told Iris to set up her rainbow-bridge in the sky, and to go quickly down to the dark cave where Ceres mourned for Proserpine, that she might persuade the goddess to forget her sorrow, and go back to the fields, where she was so much needed.
Iris found Ceres sitting in a corner of her cave, among the shadows, wrapped in dark blue draperies that made her almost invisible. The coming of Iris lighted up every part of the cave and set beautiful colors dancing everywhere, but it did not make Ceres smile.
After this, Jupiter sent the gods, one after another, down to the cave; but none of them could comfort the Earth-mother. She still mourned.
Then Jupiter sent Mercury down into Pluto’s kingdom, to see whether he could not persuade that grim king to let Proserpine return to her mother.
When Mercury told his errand to King Pluto, Proserpine jumped up from her throne, all eagerness to see her mother again, and Pluto, seeing how glad she was, could not withhold his consent. So he ordered the black horses and the golden chariot brought out to take her back; but before she sprang to the chariot’s seat, he craftily asked her if she would not eat one of the pomegranates that grew in his garden.
Proserpine tasted the fruit, taking just four seeds. Then the black horses swiftly carried Mercury and herself into the upper world, and straight to the cave where Ceres sat.
What a change! How quickly Ceres ran out of the cave, when she heard her daughter’s voice! No more mourning in shadowy places for her, now!
Proserpine told her mother everything—how she had found the wonderful narcissus, how the earth had opened, allowing King Pluto’s horses to spring out, and how the dark king had snatched her and carried her away.
“But, my dear child,” Ceres anxiously inquired, “have you eaten anything since you have been in the
underworld?”
Proserpine confessed that she had eaten the four pomegranate seeds. At that, Ceres beat her breast in despair, and then once more appealed to Jupiter. He said that Proserpine should spend eight months of every year with her mother, but would have to pass the other four—one for each pomegranate seed—in the underworld with Pluto.
So Ceres went back to her beautiful valley of Enna, and to her work in the fields. The little brown seeds that had lain asleep so long sprouted up and grew; the fountains sent up their waters; the brown grass on the hills became green; the olive trees and the grape-vines put out new leaves; the lambs and the kids throve, and skipped about more gayly than ever; and all the hosts of little birds came back with the crane of Ceres to lead them.
During the eight months that Proserpine was with her, Ceres went about again among her peasants, standing near the men while they were threshing the grain, helping the women to bake their bread, and having a care over everything that went on. She did not forget the peasant family of Greece, in whose cottage she had been invited to pass the night, and where she had cured little Triptolemus. She visited this family again and taught the young Triptolemus how to plough, to sow, and to reap, like the peasants of her own Sicily.
The time came when Proserpine was obliged to go back to King Pluto. Then Ceres went and sat among the shadows in the cave, as she had done before.
All nature slept for a while; but the peasants had no fear now, for they knew that Proserpine would surely come back, and that the great Earth-mother would then care for her children again.


PHAETHON

Phaethon was the child of Helios, the sun-god. One could see the glint of the sun’s rays in his bright yellow hair, and feel its warmth in the flash of his eyes. He was so full of life and energy that it was a pleasure to watch him. When he was playing with the other boys in the village, if they threw stones, it was Phaethon who could throw the farthest; if they ran races, Phaethon always reached the goal first; and it was the same in all their other sports.
Although these boys could not beat Phaethon in their games, they could say rude things to him, and one day, because they wished to get the better of him in some way, they all met him with a chorus of taunts and sneering words. Among other things, they said that he was not the child of Helios, and this hurt Phaethon very much, for he had always thought it a glorious thing to feel that the god of the great shining sun was his father.
The next morning, as he lay under a tree, gazing steadfastly at the sun, he thought he could see the sun- god, Helios, driving his golden chariot across the sky.
“What a fine thing it would be,” he said to himself, “if I, boy as I am, could drive that splendid chariot! Then the boys would believe that I am really the child of the sun-god.”
The thought had no sooner entered his head than he set out to go to the country where the sun rises. It was a long journey, but at last he saw the golden palace of the sun-god; and then, as he came nearer, he saw Helios himself, sitting on a throne with a crown on his head, while the Hours and the Days stood around him ready to do his bidding. The crown that Helios wore was the most wonderful crown that was ever seen; it was set thick with precious stones of the most dazzling kind; in fact, these stones were so bright that they cast rays of light all around, and whoever looked at them long was sure to be almost blinded.
Even Phaethon’s eyes could not long bear the brightness of the crown, so he stood well back from it and told Helios who he was and what the boys had said. Then he asked if there were not some way by which his playmates could be made to believe that he was really the child of the Sun.
Helios took off his crown, so that Phaethon could come nearer, and then he promised to grant any wish that the boy should make. This was a great favor, and Phaethon would not have received it if he had not been a true child of the Sun.
Phaethon clapped his hands in triumph; for he thought that now he might have his wish. The Hours were already bringing out the golden chariot of the Sun, and it seemed almost as bright as the crown of Helios. Phaethon asked instantly if he might not drive this chariot for one day.
Helios was troubled at hearing such a wish as this, but he had promised, and the gods could not break their promises; accordingly, when the Hours brought out the horses, and made everything ready, he was obliged to let Phaethon take the reins.
The horses of the Sun were powerful animals, as fiery in their temper as any creature that ever lived, even in those days of fire-breathing bulls and dragons. They seemed to be made of fire inside, and they reared and plunged and champed their bits in a way that would have thoroughly frightened most boys. But Phaethon, remembering that he was a child of the Sun, gladly took his place in the chariot.
The four horses started off at a gallop, and Phaethon was so light that the chariot was tossed back and forth as if it had been empty. The horses were frightened at once. They left the right path round the world, and began to run wildly, swerving first one way and then another.
Phaethon saw now, when it was too late, that he was too young to drive such horses. They grew more and more excited, and sparks of fire began to fly from their nostrils. The chariot, too, as it was carried faster and faster through space, began to grow brighter and hotter.
As the horses and chariot came close to the earth, mountain tops took fire and began to smoke. They came closer yet, rivers were dried up, and many, many miles of forest-land and green meadows were scorched and became like a desert. In some countries, too, the heat was so great that the people of those countries were turned to a dark color. It looked as if the whole world might be burned up.
By this time Phaethon was terrified, indeed, for his own hair was on fire. But he did not know what to do.
Jupiter, looking down from Mount Olympus, saw that the world was in great danger. Then suddenly came a terrible clap of thunder, and Phaethon fell from the chariot, down, straight down, like a falling star, into the broad river Eridanus.
And so poor Phaethon, though a true child of the Sun, failed in trying to drive his father’s fiery chariot. Perhaps he would never have attempted so daring a deed, had it not been for the unkind taunts of his playfellows. There are some things which even the children of the Sun cannot do.
His sisters, the Heliades, wept for him on the banks of the Eridanus, till at last they were changed into larch trees; and their tears, continuing to fall into the water from the branches of the trees, became drops of clear amber.


CLYTIE

Clytie and her sister, Leucothea, were water nymphs. Early every morning they used to come up from the depths of their river, with other nymphs from neighboring streams and fountains, and dance among the water-plants on its shores. But with the first rays of the rising sun, all the dancers plunged back into the water and disappeared; for that was the law among water-nymphs.
One morning Clytie and Leucothea broke this law. When the sun began to show above the hills, and all the other nymphs rushed back to their streams, these two sat on the bank of their river, and watched for the coming of the sun-god. Then as Helios drove his horses across the sky, they sat and watched him all day long.
They thought they had never seen anything so glorious. The god sat in his golden chariot with his crown on his head, and kept a firm rein on the four fire- breathing horses. The sisters were dazzled by the glitter of the chariot and the radiance of the jewelled crown. Helios smiled upon them, and they were happy.
When night came, they returned to their river, where they could think of nothing else but Helios and his golden chariot.
Before morning they fell to quarrelling, as sisters sometimes will. Then Clytie told King Oceanus how Leucothea had broken the law of the water-nymphs, but she did not say that she herself had broken it also. King Oceanus was very angry, and shut Leucothea up in a cave.
Just before daylight, Clytie went up to dance with the other nymphs, as usual, and once more she remained on the shore all day to watch the Sun. This time Helios would not smile upon her, because he knew she had been unkind to her sister. When night came, she did not go down to her home at the bottom of the river, but sat on its sandy bank, waiting for the coming of the Sun; and when he came again, she watched him, all day, and so on for nine days and nine nights. As she had broken the law, she did not dare to go home, therefore she had nothing to live on but the dew which fell from the sky. She grew so very thin that you would have thought the wind might blow her away. Foolish Clytie!
Yet, she sat there and watched the Sun, who never looked her way, and never smiled on her any more. At last her dainty feet, that had danced so lightly with the other nymphs, took root in the loose sand; her fluttering garments became green leaves; and her face, which was always turned toward the Sun, became a flower.
This flower still grows, in wet, sandy places, and still it turns slowly on its stem, always keeping its face toward the sun.


THE SEVEN SISTERS

Among the nymphs of Diana’s train were seven sisters, the daughters of Atlas. On moonlight nights these sisters used to dance in the forest glades; and one night Orion, the hunter, saw them dimly through the trees. They looked like a flock of beautiful wild birds, and the sight made the hunter’s heart beat loud and fast.
Just as he had chased the deer so many times, he began now to chase these nymphs. Not that he meant to hurt them, but he wanted to go near enough to them to see them better. The nymphs were frightened and ran away swiftly through the trees. The faster they ran, the faster Orion followed.
At last the poor frightened sisters came out into an open place, where it was almost as light as day, and there Orion nearly overtook them. Seeing how near he was, the sisters called to Diana for help; and then, when they were almost in the hunter’s grasp, they suddenly disappeared, and seven white pigeons rose from the grass where they had been, and flew away—up, up, into the night sky.
When they reached the sky, the seven pigeons became seven bright stars. There the stars shone, in a little group, close together, for hundreds of years. They were called the Pleiades.
Long after the time when the frightened nymphs were changed first into pigeons, and then into stars, one of the sisters left her place among the Pleiades, that she might not see the fall of Troy. While this city was burning, she rushed madly through space, her hair flying out behind her, and men called her a comet. She never returned to her place among the Pleiades.
At the end of his life on earth, Orion too was placed among the stars. He is there, in the sky, to this day, with his lion’s skin, his club, and his jewelled belt. Some people say that the Pleiades still fly from before him.


ENDYMION’S SLEEP

When the plains below were parched and brown and dusty with the heat of summer, on Mount Latmus all was so still and cool, so fresh and green, that one seemed to be in another world. The mountain was most beautiful of all at night, when the moon drove her chariot overhead, and flooded every tree and all the grassy slopes with her pale light.
Endymion was a young shepherd who led his flocks high up on the sides of this mountain and let them browse on the rich pasturage along the margins of its snow-fed streams. He loved the pure mountain air, and the stillness of the higher slopes, which was broken only by the tinkle of his sheep-bells, or the song of birds.
There he dreamed his days away, while his sheep and goats were feeding; or, at night, he leaned his head on a log or a mossy stone and slept with the flock.
Selene, the moon-goddess, loved to visit Mount Latmus; in fact, the mountain belonged, in some sense, to her. It was her influence that made everything there so quiet and beautiful. One night, when she had stolen down from her place in the sky for a walk through one of the flowery meadows of Mount Latmus, she found Endymion there asleep.
The shepherd looked as beautiful as any flower on the mountain, or as the swans which were floating in the lake near by, with their heads tucked under their wings. If it had not been for his regular breathing, Selene would have believed that she stood looking at a marble statue. There, at a little distance, lay his sheep. and goats, unguarded, and liable to be attacked by wild beasts. Oh, Endymion was a very careless shepherd! That was the effect of the air on Mount Latmus.
Selene knew that it was the wonderful air of her mountain which had made the shepherd heedless, as well as beautiful, therefore she stayed by his flock all night and watched it herself.
She came the next night and the next, and for many nights, to gaze at the sleeper, and to watch the unguarded flock. One morning, when she returned to the sky, she looked so pale from her watching that Jupiter asked her where she had been, and she described the beautiful shepherd she had found on her mountain, and confessed that she had been guarding his sheep.
Then she begged of Jupiter that since Endymion was so very, very beautiful he might always look as she had seen him in his sleep, instead of growing old as other mortals must. Jupiter answered, “Even the gods cannot give to mortals everlasting youth and beauty without giving them also everlasting sleep; but Endymion shall sleep forever and be forever young.”
So there, in a cave, on Mount Latmus, Endymion sleeps on to this day; and his wonderful beauty has not faded in the smallest degree, but is a joy still to all who can climb those lofty heights.


WHY CADMUS FOUNDED A CITY

One day, a little girl called Europa was playing in a meadow by the seashore. She sat on the grass with her lap full of flowers, and was plaiting the flowers into wreaths for her three big brothers, Cadmus, Phœnix, and Cilix, who were not far away.
Suddenly she looked up and saw a snow-white bull, with beautiful silvery horns, standing near her. At first she was afraid, but the bull seemed so gentle,
and looked at her in such a friendly way, that she lost all fear of it. Taking some clover blossoms from her lap, she ran up to it and held them to its mouth. It ate the flowers daintily from her fingers, and then began skipping around on the grass almost as lightly as a bird. Finally, coming to the place where Europa was plaiting her flowers, it lay down by her side. She patted it and threw some of the wreaths over its horns, then clapped her hands to see how pretty they looked. After this, she climbed up to its back, when it got up and galloped around the meadow with her. Europa, holding on by one of its white horns, laughed, and enjoyed the ride, and did not notice that the bull was taking her farther and farther away from home, and closer to the shore, till it suddenly jumped into the sea and began to swim away with her. Then she was frightened and screamed for her brothers, who heard her, and ran down to the shore. But they could not stop the white bull. Europa was carried off, and was never seen nor heard from again.
When the three brothers told their father, King Agenor, what had happened, he was quite broken-
hearted and very angry besides. He said that little Europa should not have been left alone, and he blamed Cadmus more than the other brothers, because Cadmus was the oldest.
Finally he said to Cadmus, “Go and find Europa and bring her back; or, if you cannot find her, never enter the doors of your father’s palace again.”
In those days, one could not go far from a walled city without meeting with many dangers; hence, in order that Cadmus might not be entirely alone, his father sent two slaves to bear him company.
When the great gates of the city closed behind them, the three started out, walking toward the west, as that was the direction that the bull had taken. They passed through lonely forests; they crossed mountain- chains; they contrived to make their way across the sea to other lands; but they could not find Europa nor hear any news of her. Cadmus felt quite sure that the search was useless.
As Cadmus did not dare to go home without his sister, he asked the oracle at the shrine of Apollo what he should do. The shrine of Apollo was in a cave at the foot of Mount Parnassus, and the oracle was a mysterious voice that seemed to come from the heart of the mountain. The voice told Cadmus to follow a white heifer he would see, and afterward to build a city on the spot where he saw her lie down.
After leaving the cave, Cadmus hardly had time to scramble down into the road again before he saw a white heifer, which he followed, as the voice had told him to do. When the heifer came to a certain beautiful valley, she raised her head, as if she were looking up to heaven, and then made a great lowing, after which she lay down, seemingly quite contented with the spot. Cadmus knew that this was the place where he must build his city.
Near the spot the heifer had chosen was a grove of very old trees, and among the trees, in a rocky place, was a cave. The mouth of the cave was so choked with willows that one could not see what it was like inside, but Cadmus thought he could hear water trickling down, and the sound seemed so cool and inviting that he sent one of his slaves into the cave to look for a spring. The man did not come back. Then Cadmus sent the other slave to see what had become of the first one. But that one did not come back either.
So Cadmus threw a lion’s skin around his shoulders, took his lance and his javelin, and went into the mouth of the cave himself. At first, it was so dark inside that he could see nothing. When his eyes had become accustomed to the change from the bright sunshine he had just left, he saw, in the darkness, two bright spots, and knew that they must be the two eyes of some beast. As he could see better, he made out the form of a huge dragon lying with one of its ugly claws across something, which he feared might be the body of one of his faithful slaves. He took up a large stone and hurled it straight at the creature’s head, but the scales of the dragon were so hard and tough that the stone rolled away without doing it any harm. Then he threw his javelin at it, and wounded it with that; but not being much disabled, the creature came out of the cave hissing, and attacked him fiercely. As it came nearer, he pushed his lance straight into its open mouth, and finally pinned it to an oak which grew there, and so killed it.
As Cadmus stood looking at the dragon, he realized that although he had killed the monster, he had lost his two slaves, and was alone in a strange country, where, without help, he would have to build the city ordered by the oracle. Just then he was aware that some one was standing at his side. He looked up and saw a tall, strong-looking woman with clear gray eyes. She had a lance in her hand and a helmet on her head. He knew at once that it was the warrior-goddess, Minerva, and as he looked at her he felt his courage coming back.
Minerva told him to plough the ground near by and sow the dragon’s teeth. This seemed like strange seed to plant, but Cadmus did as he was bidden to do, and then stood waiting to see what would happen.
After a short time the soil began to heave up a little in places, as it does when corn is growing, then, instead of blades of corn, sharp steel points began to show. As they came up farther, these looked like spear-points; then helmets appeared all along the rows; finally, fully armed men had grown up out of the earth and stood looking around fiercely, ready to fight.
Cadmus thought he had a worse enemy now than the dragon, and made ready to defend himself. But there was no need. For the armed men were hardly out of the soil before they began fighting, one with another, and they fell so fast that soon only five were left.
But these last five were wiser than their brothers, for they saw that they gained nothing by killing one another. Instead, they threw their arms on the ground with a crash, and shook hands, to see what would come from helping others.
This worked much better. Cadmus shook hands with the rest, and then they all united to build the city on the spot where the heifer had lain down. The new city was called Thebes. It was prosperous, and all lived there happily for many years, with Cadmus as king.


ECHO

Echo was a nymph who talked too much. She was very fond of having the last word. One day she spoke rudely to the great Juno, who said that for this offence Echo should never use her voice again, unless to repeat what she had just heard, but since she was so very fond of last words, she might repeat the last words of others.
This was almost as bad as if Juno had changed her into a parrot. Echo was very much ashamed, and hid herself in the forest.
Narcissus, a young man who had hair as yellow as gold and eyes as blue as the sky,—a very rare thing in Greece, where most people were very dark,—used to hunt in the forest where Echo was hiding. As she was peeping out shyly from some cave or from behind a great tree, Echo often saw Narcissus, and she admired him very much.
One day Narcissus became separated from his friends, and hearing something rustle among the leaves, he called out, “Who’s here?”
“Here,” answered Echo.
“Here I am. Come!” said Narcissus.
“I am come,” said Echo; and, as she spoke, she came out from among the trees.
When Narcissus saw a stranger, instead of one of his friends as he had expected, he looked surprised and walked quickly away.
After this, Echo never came out and allowed herself to be seen again, and in time she faded away till she became only a voice.
This voice was heard for many, many years in forests and among mountains, particularly in caves. In their solitary walks, hunters often heard it. Sometimes it mocked the barking of their dogs; sometimes it repeated their own last words. It always had a weird and mournful sound, and seemed to make lonely places more lonely still.


NARCISSUS

Narcissus had a twin sister whom he loved better than any one else in the world. This sister died when she was young and very beautiful. Narcissus missed her so very much that he wished he might die too.
One day, as he sat on the ground by a spring, looking absently into the water and thinking of his lost sister, he saw a face like hers, looking up at him. It seemed as if his sister had become a water-nymph and were actually there in the spring, but she would not speak to him.
Of course the face Narcissus saw was really the reflection of his own face in the water, but he did not know that. In those days there were no clear mirrors like ours; and the idea of one’s appearance that could be got from a polished brass shield, for instance, was a very dim one. So Narcissus leaned over the water and looked at the beautiful face so like his sister’s, and wondered what it was and whether he should ever see his sister again.
After this, he came back to the spring day after day and looked at the face he saw there, and mourned for his sister until, at last, the gods felt sorry for him and changed him into a flower.
This flower was the first narcissus. All the flowers of this family, when they grow by the side of a pond or a stream, still bend their beautiful heads and look at the reflection of their own faces in the water.


HYACINTHUS

Hyacinthus was a beautiful Greek boy who was greatly loved by Apollo. Apollo often laid aside his golden lyre and his arrows, and came down from Mount Olympus to join Hyacinthus in his boyish occupations. The two were often busy all day long, following the hunting-dogs over the mountains or setting fish nets in the river or playing at various games.
Their favorite exercise was the throwing of the discus. The discus was a heavy metal plate about a foot across, which was thrown somewhat as the quoit is thrown. One day Apollo threw the discus first, and sent it whirling high up among the clouds, for the god had great strength. It came down in a fine, strong curve, and Hyacinthus ran to pick it up. Then, as it fell on the hard earth, the discus bounded up again and struck the boy a cruel blow on his white forehead.
Apollo turned as pale as Hyacinthus, but he could not undo what had been done. He could only hold his friend in his arms, and see his head droop like a lily on a broken stem, while the purple blood from his wound was staining the earth.
There was still one way by which Apollo could make Hyacinthus live, and this was to change him into a flower. So, quickly, before it was too late, he whispered over him certain words the gods knew, and Hyacinthus became a purple flower, a flower of the color of the blood that had flowed from his forehead. As the flower unfolded, it showed a strange mark on its petals, which looked like the Greek words meaning woe! woe!
Apollo never forgot his boy friend; but sang about him to the accompaniment of his wonderful lyre till the name of Hyacinthus was known and loved all over Greece.


ATLAS AND PROMETHEUS

PROMETHEUS, the creator of mankind, whom some include among the seven Titans,
was the son either of the Titan Eurymedon, or of Iapetus by the nymph Clymene; and his
brothers were Epimetheus, Atlas, and Menoetius.
b. Gigantic Atlas, eldest of the brothers, knew all the depths of the sea; he ruled over a
kingdom with a precipitous coastline, larger than Africa and Asia put together. This land of
Atlantis lay beyond the Pillars of Heracles, and a chain of fruit-bearing islands separated it
from a farther continent, unconnected with ours. Atlas’s people canalized and cultivated an
enormous central plain, fed by water from the hills which ringed it completely, except for a
seaward gap. They also built palaces, baths, race-courses, great harbour works, had temples;
and carried war not only westwards as far as the other continent, but eastward as far as Egypt
and Italy. The Egyptians say that Atlas was the son of Poseidon, whose five pairs of male
twins all swore allegiance to their brother by the blood of a bull sacrificed at the pillar-top;
and that at first they were extremely virtuous, bearing with fortitude the burden of their great
wealth in gold and silver. But one day greed and cruelty overcame them and, with Zeus’s
permission, the Athenians defeated them single-handed and destroyed their power. At the
same time, the gods sent a deluge which, in one day and one night, overwhelmed all Atlantis,
so that the harbour works and temples were buried beneath a waste of mud and the sea
became unnavigable.
c. Atlas and Menoetius, who escaped, then joined Cronus and the Titans in their
unsuccessful war against the Olympian gods. Zeus killed Menoetius with a thunderbolt and
sent him down to Tartarus: but spared Atlas, whom he condemned to support Heaven on his
shoulders for all eternity.
d. Atlas was the father of the Pleiades, the Hyades, and the Hesperides; and has held up
the Heavens ever since, except on one occasion when Heracles temporarily relieved him of
the task. Some say that Perseus petrified Atlas into Mount Atlas by showing him the Gorgon’s
head, but they forget that Perseus was in common opinion, equivalent to Heracles.
e. Prometheus, being wiser than Atlas, foresaw the issue of the rebellion against Cronus,
and therefore preferred to fight on Zeus’s side, persuading Epimetheus to do the same. He was, indeed, the wisest of his race, and Athene, at whose birth from Zeus’s head he had
assisted, taught him architecture, astronomy, mathematics, navigation, medicine, metallurgy,
and other useful arts, which he passed on to mankind. But Zeus, who had decided to extirpate
the whole race of man, and spared them only at Prometheus’s urgent plea, grew angry at their
increasing powers and talents.
f. One day, when a dispute took place at Sicyon, as to which portions of a sacrificial bull
should be offered to the gods, and which should be reserved for men, Prometheus was invited
to act as arbiter. He therefore rayed and jointed a bull, and sewed its hide to form two open-
mouthed bags, filling these with what he had cut up. One bag contained all the flesh, but this
he concealed beneath the stomach, which is the least tempting part of any animal; and the
other contained the bones, hidden beneath a rich layer of fat. When he offered Zeus the choice
of either, Zeus, easily deceived, chose the bag containing the bones and fat (which are still the
divine portion); but punished Prometheus, who was laughing at him behind his back, by
withholding fire from mankind. ‘Let them eat their flesh raw!’ he cried.
g. Prometheus at once went to Athene, with a plea for a backstairs admittance to Olympus,
and this she granted. On his arrival, he lighted a torch at the fiery chariot of the Sun and
presently broke from it a fragment of glowing charcoal, which he thrust into the pithy hollow
of a giant fennel-stalk. Then, extinguishing his torch, he stole away undiscovered, and gave
fire to mankind.
h. Zeus swore revenge. He ordered Hephaestus to make a clay woman, and the four Winds
to breathe life into her, and all the goddesses of Olympus to adorn her. This woman, Pandora,
the most beautiful ever created, Zeus sent as a gift to Epimetheus, under Hermes’s escort. But
Epimetheus, having been warned by his brother to accept no gift from Zeus, respectfully
excused himself. Now more grieved even than before, Zeus had Prometheus chained naked to
a pillar in the Caucasian mountains, where a greedy vulture tore at his liver all day, year in,
year out; and there was no end to the pain, because every night (during which Prometheus
was exposed to cruel frost and cold) his liver grew whole again.
i. But Zeus, loath to confess that he had been vindictive, excused his savagery by
circulating a falsehood: Athene, he said, had invited Prometheus to Olympus for a secret love
affair.
j. Epimetheus, alarmed by his brother’s fate, hastened to marry Pandora, whom Zeus had
made as foolish, mischievous, and idle as she was beautiful—the first of a long line of such
women. Presently she opened a jar, which Prometheus had warned Epimetheus to keep closed,
and in which he had been at pains to imprison all the Spites that might plague mankind: such
as Old Age, Labour, Sickness, Insanity, Vice, and Passion. Out these flew in a cloud, stung
Epimetheus and Pandora in every part of their bodies, and then attacked the race of mortals.
Delusive Hope, however, whom Prometheus had also shut in the jar, discouraged them by her
lies from a general suicide.


ORION

ORION, a hunter of Boeotian Hyria, and the handsomest man alive, was the son of
Poseidon and Euryale. Coming one day to Hyria in Chios, he fell in love with Merope,
daughter of Dionysus’s son Oenopion. Oenopion had promised Merope to Orion in marriage,
if he would free the island from the dangerous wild beasts that infested it; and this he set
himself to do, bringing the pelts to Merope every evening. But when the task was at last
accomplished, and he claimed her as his wife, Oenopion brought him rumours of lions, bears,
and wolves still lurking in the hills, and refused to give her up, the fact being that he was in
love with her himself.
b. One night Orion, in disgust, drank a skinful of Oenopion’s wine, which so inflamed
him that he broke into Merope’s bedroom, and forced her to lie with him. When dawn came,
Oenopion invoked his father, Dionysus, who sent satyrs to ply Orion with still more wine,
until he fell fast asleep; whereupon Oenopion put out both his eyes and flung him on the
seashore. An oracle announced that the blind man would regain his sight, if he travelled to the
east and turned his eye-sockets towards Helius at the point where he first rises from Ocean.
Orion at once rowed out to sea in a small boat and, following the sound of a Cyclops’s
hammer, reached Lemnos. There he entered the smithy of Hephaestus, snatched up an
apprentice named Cedalion, and carried him off on his shoulders as a guide. Cedalion led
Orion over land and sea, until he came at last to the farthest Ocean, where Eos fell in love
with him, and her brother Helius duly restored his sight.
c. After visiting Delos in Eos’s company, Orion returned to avenge himself on Oenopion,
whom he could not, however, find anywhere in Chios, because he was hiding in an
underground chamber made for him by Hephaestus. Sailing on to Crete, where he thought that
Oenopion might have fled for protection to his grandfather Minos, Orion met Artemis, who
shared his love of the chase. She soon persuaded him to forget his vengeance and, instead,
come hunting with her.
d. Now, Apollo was aware that Orion had not refused Eos’s invitation to her couch in the
holy island of Delos—Dawn still daily blushes to remember this indiscretion—and, further,
boasted that he rid the whole earth of wild beasts and monsters. Fearing, therefore, his sister
Artemis might prove as susceptible as Eos, Apollo went Mother Earth and, mischievously
repeating Orion’s boast, arranged for a monstrous scorpion to pursue him. Orion attacked the
scorpion first with arrows, then with his sword, but, finding that its armour is proof against
any mortal weapon, dived into the sea and swam in the direction of Delos where, he hoped,
Eos would protect him. Apollo then called to Artemis: ‘Do you see that black object bobbing
about in the sea, far away, close to Ortygia? It is the head of a villain, called Candaon, who
has just seduced Opis, one of your Hyperborean priestesses. I challenge you to transfix it with
an arrow!’ Now, Cadaon was Orion’s Boeotian nickname, though Artemis did not know this.
She took careful aim, let fly, and, swimming out to retrieve the quarry, found that she had shot Orion through the head. In great grief she implored Apollo’s son Asclepius to revive him,
and he consented but was destroyed by Zeus’s thunderbolt before he could accomplish his
task. Artemis then set Orion’s image among the stars, eternally pursued by the Scorpion; his
ghost had already descended to Asphodel Fields.
e. Some, however, say that the scorpion stung Orion to death, a that Artemis was vexed
with him for having amorously chased the virgin companions, the seven Pleiades, daughters
of Atlas and Pleione, they fled across the meadows of Boeotia, until the gods, having changed
them into doves, set their images among the stars. But this is a mistaken account, since the
Pleiades were not virgins: three of the had lain with Zeus, two with Poseidon, one with Ares,
and the seventh married Sisyphus of Corinth, and failed to be included in the constellation,
because Sisyphus was a mere mortal.
f. Others tell the following strange story of Orion’s birth, to account for his name (which
is sometimes written Urion) and for the tradition that he was a son of Mother Earth. Hyricus,
a poor bee-keeper a farmer, had vowed to have no children, and he grew old and impotent.
When, one day, Zeus and Hermes visited him in disguise, and were hospitably entertained,
they enquired what gift he most desired. Sighing deeply, Hyricus replied that what he most
wanted, namely to have a son, was now impossible. The gods, however, instructed him to
sacrifice a bull, make water on its hide, and then bury it in his wit grave. He did so and, nine
months later, a child was born to him, who he named Urion—‘he who makes water’—and,
indeed, both the rising and setting of the constellation Orion bring rain.


HELIUS

HELIUS, whom the cow-eyed Euryphaessa, or Theia, bore to the Titan Hyperion, is a
brother of Selene and Eos. Roused by the crowing of the cock, which is sacred to him, and
heralded by Eos, he drives by four-horse chariot daily across the Heavens from a magnificent
palace in the far east, near Colchis, to an equally magnificent far-western palace, where his
unharnessed horses pasture in the Islands of the Blessed. He sails home along the Ocean
stream, which flows around the world, embarking his chariot and team on a golden ferry-boat
made for him by Hephaestus, and sleeps all night in a comfortable cabin.
b. Helius can see everything that happens on earth, but is not particularly observant—once
he even failed to notice the robbery of his sacred cattle by Odysseus’s companions. He has
several herds of such cattle, each consisting of three hundred and fifty head. Those in Sicily
are tended by his daughters Phaetusa and Lampetia, but he keeps his finest herd in the
Spanish island of Erytheia. Rhodes is his freehold. It happened that, when Zeus was allotting
islands and cities to the various gods, he forgot to include Helius among these, and ‘Alas!’ he
said, ‘now I shall have to begin all over again.’
‘No, Sire,’ replied Helius politely, ‘today I noticed signs of a new island emerging from
the sea, to the south of Asia Minor. I shall be well content with that.’
c. Zeus called the Fate Lachesis to witness that any such new island should belong to
Helius; and, when Rhodes had risen well above the waves, Helius claimed it and begot seven
sons and a daughter there on the Nymph Rhode. Some say that Rhodes had existed before this
time, and was re-emerging from the waves after having been overwhelmed by the great flood
which Zeus sent. The Telchines were its aboriginal inhabitants and Poseidon fell in love with
one of them, the nymph Halia, on whom he begot Rhode and six sons; which six sons insulted
Aphrodite in her passage from Cythera to Paphos, and were struck mad by her; they ravished
their mother and committed other outrages so foul that Poseidon sank them underground, and
they became the Eastern Demons. But Halia threw herself into the sea and was deified as
Leucothea—though the same story is told of Ino, mother of Corinthian Melicertes. The Telchines, foreseeing the flood, sailed away in all directions, especially to Lycia, and
abandoned their claims on Rhodes. Rhode was thus left the sole heiress, and her seven sons
by Helius ruled in the island after its re-emergence. They became famous astronomers, and
had one sister named Electryo, who died a virgin and is now worshipped as a demi-goddess.
One of them, by name Actis, was banished for fratricide, and fled to Egypt, where he founded
the city of Heliopolis, and fist taught the Egyptians astrology, inspired by his father Helius.
The Rhodians have now built the Colossus, seventy cubits high, in his honour. Zeus also
added to Helius’s dominions the new island of Sicily, which had been a missile flung in the
battle with the Gigants.
d. One morning Helius yielded to his son Phaëthon who had been constantly plaguing him
for permission to drive the sun-chariot. Phaëthon wished to show his sisters Prote and
Clymene what a free fellow he was: and his fond mother Rhode (whose name is uncertain
because she had been called by both her daughters’ names and by that of Rhode) encouraged
him. But, not being strong enough to check the career of the white horses, which his sisters
had yoked for him, Phaëthon drove them first so high above the earth that everyone shivered,
and then so near the earth that he scorched the fields. Zeus, in a fit of rage, killed him with a
thunderbolt, and he fell into the river Po. His grieving sisters were changed into poplar-trees
on its banks, which weep amber tears; or, some say, into alder-trees.


THE ORACLES

THE Oracles of Greece and Greater Greece are many; but the eldest is that of Dodonian
Zeus. In ages past, two black doves flew from Egyptian Thebes: one to Libyan Ammon, the
other to Dodona, and each alighted on an oak-tree, which they proclaimed to be an oracle of
Zeus. At Dodona, Zeus’s priestesses listen to the cooing of doves, or to the rustling of oak-
leaves, or to the clanking of brazen vessels suspended from the branches. Zeus has another
famous oracle at Olympia, where his priests reply to questions after inspecting the entrails of
sacrificial victims.
b. The Delphic Oracle first belonged to Mother Earth, who appointed Daphnis as her
prophetess; and Daphnis, seated on a tripod, drank in the fumes of prophecy, as Pythian
priestess still does. Some say that Mother Earth later resigned her rights to the Titaness
Phoebe, or Themis; and that she ceded them to Apollo, who built himself a shrine of laurel-
boughs brought from Tempe. But others say that Apollo robbed the oracle from Mother Earth,
after killing Python, and that his Hyperborean priests Pagasus and Agyieus established his
worship there.
c. At Delphi it is said that the first shrine was made of bees-wax and feathers; the second,
of fern-stalks twisted together; the third, of laurel-boughs; that Hephaestus built the fourth of
bronze, with golden song-birds perched on the roof, but one day the earth engulfed it; and that
the fifth, built of dressed stone, burned down in the year of the fifty-eighth Olympiad, and
was replaced by the present shrine.
d. Apollo owns numerous other oracular shrines: such as those in the Lycaeum and on the
Acropolis at Argos, both presided over by a priestess. But at Boeotian Ismenium, his oracles
are given by priests, after the inspection of entrails; at Clarus, near Colophon, his seer drinks
the water of a secret well and pronounces an oracle in verse; while at Telmessus and
elsewhere, dreams are interpreted.
e. Demeter’s priestesses give oracles to the sick at Patrae, from a mirror lowered into her
well by a rope. At Pharae, in return for a copper coin, the sick who consult Hermes are
granted their oracular responses in the first chance words that they hear on leaving the market
place.
f. Hera has a venerable oracle near Pagae; and Mother Earth is still consulted at Aegeira in
Achaea, which means ‘The Place of Black Poplars’, where her priestess drinks bull’s blood,
deadly poison to all other mortals.
g. Besides these, there are many other oracles of heroes, the oracle of Heracles, at
Achaean Bura, where the answer is given by a throw of four dice; and numerous oracles of
Asclepius, where the sick flock for consultation and for cure, and are told the remedy in their dreams after a fast. The oracles of Theban Amphiaraus and Mallian Amphilochus—with
Mopsus, the most infallible extant—follow the Asclepian procedure.
h. Moreover, Pasiphaë has an oracle at Laconian Thalamae, patronized by the Kings of
Sparta, where answers are also given in dreams.
i. Some oracles are not so easily consulted as others. For instance, at Lebadeia there is an
oracle of Trophonius, son of Erginus the Argonaut, where the suppliant must purify himself
several days beforehand, and lodge in a building dedicated to Good Fortune and a certain
Good Genius, bathing only in the river Hercyna and sacrificing to Trophonius, to his nurse
Demeter Europe, and to other deities. There he feeds on sacred flesh, especially that of a ram
which has been sacrificed to the shade of Agamedes, the brother of Trophonius, who helped
him to build Apollo’s temple at Delphi.
j. When fit to consult the oracle, the suppliant is led down to the river by two boys,
thirteen years of age, and there bathed and anointed. Next, he drinks from a spring called the
Water of Lethe, which will help him to forget his past; and also from another, close by, called
the Water of Memory, which will help him to remember what he saw and heard. Dressed in
country boots and a linen tunic, and with fillets like a sacrificial victim, he then approaches
the oracular cave. This resembles a huge bread-baking pot eight yards deep, and descending
by a ladder, he finds a narrow opening at the back through which he thrusts his legs, holding
in either hand a barley cake mixed with honey. A sudden tug at his ankles, and he is pulled
through as if by the swirl of a swift river, and in the darkness a blow falls skull, so that he
seems to die, and an invisible speaker then reveals future to him, besides many mysterious
secrets. As soon as the has finished, he loses all sense and understanding, and is returned, feet
foremost, to the bottom of the chasm, but without honey-cakes; after which he is enthroned on
the so-called Chair of Memory and asked to repeat what he has heard. Finally, still in a dizzy
condition, he returns to the house of the Good Genius, where he regains his senses and the
power to laugh.
k. The invisible speaker is one of the Good Genii, belonging to Golden Age of Cronus,
who have descended from the moon to be in charge of oracles and initiatory rites, and act as
chasteners, war and saviours everywhere; he consults the ghost of Trophonius in serpent form
and gives the required oracle as payment for the suppliant’s honey-cakes.


PERSEUS

ABAS, King of Argolis and grandson of Danaus, was so renowned a warrior that, after he
died, rebels against the royal House could be put to flight merely by displaying his shield. He
married Aglaia, to whose twin sons, Proetus and Acrisius, he bequeathed his kingdom,
bidding them rule alternately. Their quarrel, which began in the womb, became more bitter
than ever when Proetus lay with Acrisius’s daughter Danaë, and barely escaped alive. Since
Acrisius now refused to give up the throne at the end of his term, Proetus fled to the court of
Iobates, King of Lycia, whose daughter Stheneboea, or Anteia, he married; returning
presently at the head of a Lycian army to support his claims to the succession. A bloody battle
was fought, but since neither side gained the advantage, Proetus and Acrisius reluctantly
agreed to divide the kingdom between them. Acrisius’s share was to be Argos and its environs;
Proetus’s was to be Tiryns, the Heraeum (now part of Mycenae), Midea, and the coast of
Argolis.
b. Seven gigantic Cyclopes, called Gasterocheires, because they earned their living as
masons, accompanied Proetus from Lycia, and fortified Tiryns with massive walls, using
blocks of stone so large that a mule team could not have stirred the least of them.
c. Acrisius, who was married to Aganippe, had no sons, but only this one daughter Danaë
whom Proteus had seduced; and, when he asked an oracle how to procure a male heir, was
told: ‘You will have no sons, and your grandson must kill you.’ To forestall this fate, Acrisius
imprisoned Danaë in a dungeon with brazen doors, guarded by savage dogs; but, despite these
precautions, Zeus came upon her in a shower of gold, and she bore him a son named Perseus.
When Acrisius learned of Danaë’s condition, he would not believe that Zeus was the father,
and suspected his brother Proetus of having renewed his intimacy with her; but, not daring to
kill his own daughter, locked her and the infant Perseus in a wooden ark, which he cast into
the sea. This ark was washed towards the island of Seriphos, where a fisherman named Dictys
netted it, hauled it ashore, broke it open and found both Danaë and Perseus still alive. He took
them at once to his brother, King Polydectes, who reared Perseus in his own house.
d. Some years passed and Perseus, grown to manhood, defended Danaë against Polydectes
who, with his subjects’ support, had tried to force marriage upon her. Polydectes then
assembled his friends and, pretending that he was about to sue for the hand of Hippodameia,
daughter of Pelops, asked them to contribute one horse apiece as his love-gift. ‘Seriphos is
only a small island,’ he said,’ but I do not wish to cut a poor figure beside the wealthy suitors
from the mainland. Will you be able to help me, noble Perseus?’
‘Alas,’ answered Perseus, ‘I possess no horse, nor any gold to buy one. But if you intend
to marry Hippodameia, and not my mother, I will contrive to win whatever gift you name.’
He added rashly: ‘Even the Gorgon Medusa’s head, if need be.’
e. ‘That would indeed please me more than any horse in the world,’ replied Polydectes at
once. Now, the Gorgon Medusa had serpents for hair, huge teeth, protruding tongue, and
altogether so ugly a face that all who gazed at it were petrified with fright.
f. Athene overheard the conversation at Seriphos and, being a sworn enemy of Medusa’s,
for whose frightful appearance she had herself been responsible, accompanied Perseus on his
adventure. First she led him to the city of Deicterion in Samos, where images of all the three
Gorgons are displayed, thus enabling him to distinguish Medusa from her immortal sisters
Stheno and Euryale; then she warned him never to look at Medusa directly, but only at her
reflection, and presented him with a brightly-polished shield.
g. Hermes also helped Perseus, giving him an adamantine sickle with which to cut off
Medusa’s head. But Perseus still needed a pair of winged sandals, a magic wallet to contain
the decapitated head, and the dark helmet of invisibility which belonged to Hades. All these
things were in the care of the Stygian Nymphs, from whom Perseus had to fetch them; but
their whereabouts were known only to the Gorgons’ sisters, the three swan-like Graeae, who
had a single eye and tooth among the three of them. Perseus accordingly sought out the
Graeae on their thrones at the foot of Mount Atlas. Creeping up behind them, he snatched the
eye and tooth, as they were being passed from one sister to another, and would not return
either until he had been told where the Stygian Nymphs lived.
h. Perseus then collected the sandals, wallet, and helmet from the nymphs, and flew
westwards to the Land of the Hyperboreans, where he found the Gorgons asleep, among rain-
worn shapes of men and wild beasts petrified by Medusa. He fixed his eyes on the reflection
in the shield, Athene guided his hand, and he cut off Medusa’s head with one stroke of the
sickle; whereupon, to his surprise, the winged horse Pegasus, and the warrior Chrysaor
grasping a golden falchion, sprang fully-grown from her dead body. Perseus was unaware that
these had been begotten on Medusa by Poseidon in one of Athene’s temples, but decided not
to antagonize them further. Hurriedly thrusting the head into his wallet, he took flight; and
though Stheno and Euryale, awakened by their new nephews, rose to pursue him, the helmet
made Perseus invisible, and he escaped safely southward.
i. At sunset, Perseus alighted near the palace of the Titan Atlas to whom, as a punishment
for his inhospitality, he showed the Gorgon’s head and thus transformed him into a mountain;
and on the following day turned eastward and flew across the Ulbyan desert, Hermes helping
him to carry the weighty head. By the way he dropped the Graeae’s eye and tooth into Lake
Triton; and some drops of Gorgon blood fell the desert sand, where they bred a swarm of
venomous serpents, one of which later killed Mopsus the Argonaut.
j. Perseus paused for refreshment at Chemmis in Egypt, where he is still worshipped, and
then flew on. As he rounded the coast of Philistia to the north, he caught sight of a naked
woman chained to a sea-cliff, and instantly fell in love with her. This was Andromeda,
daughter of Cepheus, the Ethiopian King of Joppa, and Cassiopeia. Cassiopeia had boasted
that both she and her daughter were more beautiful than the Nereids, who complained of this
insult to their protector Poseidon. Poseidon sent a flood and a female sea-monster to devastate
Philistia; and when Cepheus consulted the Oracle of Ammon, he was told that his only hope
of deliverance lay in sacrificing Andromeda to the monster. His subjects had therefore obliged
him to chain her to a rock, naked except for certain jewels, and leave her to be devoured.
k. As Perseus flew towards Andromeda, he saw Cepheus and Cassiopeia watching
anxiously from the shore near by, and alighted beside them for a hurried consultation. On
condition that, if he rescued her, she should be his wife and return to Greece with him,
Perseus took to the air again, grasped his sickle and, diving murderously from above,
beheaded the approaching monster, which was deceived by his shadow on the sea. He had
drawn the Gorgon’s head from the wallet, lest the monster might look up, and now laid it face
downwards on a bed of leaves and sea-weed (which instantly turned to coral), while he
cleansed his hands of blood, raised three altars and sacrificed a calf, a cow, and a bull to
Hermes, Athene, and Zeus respectively.
l. Cepheus and Cassiopeia grudgingly welcomed him as their son-in-law and, on
Andromeda’s insistence, the wedding took place at once; but the festivities were rudely
interrupted when Agenor, King Belus’s twin brother, entered at the head of an armed party,
claiming Andromeda for himself. He was doubtless summoned by Cassiopeia, since she and
Cepheus at once broke faith with Perseus, pleading that the promise of Andromeda’s hand
had been forced from them by circumstances, and that Agenor’s claim was the prior one.
‘Perseus must die!’ cried Cassiopeia fiercely.
m. In the ensuing fight, Perseus struck down many of his opponents but, being greatly
outnumbered, was forced to snatch the Gorgon’s head from its bed of coral and turn the
remaining two hundred of them to stone.
n. Poseidon set the images of Cepheus and Cassiopeia among the stars—the latter, as a
punishment for her treachery, is tied in a market-basket which, at some seasons of the year,
turns upside-down, so that she looks ridiculous. But Athene afterwards placed Andromeda’s
image in a more honourable constellation, because she had insisted on marrying Perseus,
despite her parents’ ill faith. The marks left by her chains are still pointed out on a cliff near
Joppa; and the monster’s petrified bones were exhibited in the city itself until Marcus
Aemilius Scaurus had them taken to Rome during his aedileship.
o. Perseus returned hurriedly to Seriphos, taking Andromeda with him, and found that
Danaë and Dictys, threatened by the violence of Polydectes who, of course, never intended to
marry Hippodameia, had taken refuge in a temple. He therefore went straight to the palace
where Polydectes was banqueting with his companions, and announced that he had brought
the promised love-gift. Greeted by a storm of insults, he displayed the Gorgon’s head,
averting his own gaze as he did so, and turned them all to stone; the circle of boulders is still
shown in Seriphos. He then gave the head to Athene, who fixed it on her aegis; and Hermes
returned the sandals, wallet, and helmet to the guardianship of the Stygian nymphs.
p. After raising Dictys to the throne of Seriphos, Perseus set sail for Argos, accompanied
by his mother, his wife, and a party of Cyclopes. Acrisius, hearing of their approach, fled to
Pelasgian Larissa; but Perseus happened to be invited there for the funeral games which King
Teutamides was holding in honour of his dead father, and competed in the five-fold contest.
When it came to the discus-throw, his discus, carried out of its path by the wind and the will
of the Gods, struck Acrisius’s foot and killed him.
q. Greatly grieved, Perseus buried his grandfather in the temple of Athene which crowns
the local acropolis and then, being ashamed to reign in Argos, went to Tiryns, where Proetus
had been succeeded by his son Megapenthes, and arranged to exchange kingdoms with him.
So Megapenthes moved to Argos, while Perseus reigned in Tiryns and presently won back the
other two parts of Proetus’s original kingdom.
r. Perseus fortified Midea, and founded Mycenae, so called because, when he was thirsty,
a mushroom [mycos] sprang up, and provided him with a stream of water. The Cyclopes built
the walls of both cities.
s. Others give a very different account of the matter. They say that Polydectes succeeded
in marrying Danaë, and reared Perseus in the temple of Athene. Some years later, Acrisius
heard of their survival and sailed to Seriphos, resolving this time to kill Perseus with his own
hand. Polydectes intervened and made each of them solemnly swear never to attempt the
other’s life. However, a storm arose and, while Acrisius’s ship was still hauled up on the
beach, weather-bound, Polydectes died. During his funeral games, Perseus threw a discus
which accidentally struck Acrisius on the head and killed him. Perseus then sailed to Argos
and claimed the throne, but found that Proetus had usurped it, and therefore turned him into
stone; thus he now reigned over the whole of Argolis, until Megapenthes avenged his father’s
death by murdering him.
t. As for the Gorgon Medusa, they say that she was a beautiful daughter of Phorcys, who
had offended Athene, and led the Libyans of Lake Tritonis in battle. Perseus, coming from
Argos with an army, was helped by Athene to assassinate Medusa. He cut off her head by
night, and buried it under a mound of earth in the market place at Argos. This mound lies
close to the grave of Perseus’s daughter Gorgophone, notorious as the first widow ever to
remarry.


BELLEROPHON

BELLEROPHON, son of Glaucus and grandson of Sisyphus, left Corinth under a cloud,
disgraced by having first killed one Bellerus—which earned him nickname Bellerophontes,
shortened to Bellerophon—and then own brother, whose name is usually given as Deliades.
He fled as suppliant to Proetus, King of Tiryns; but (so ill luck) would have Anteia, Proetus’s
wife whom some call Stheneboea, fell in love wit him at sight. When he rejected her advances,
she accused him of having tried to seduce her, and Proetus, who believed the story, grew
incensed. Yet he dared not risk the Furies’ vengeance by the direct murder of a suppliant, and
therefore sent him to Anteia’s father Iobates, King of Lycia, carrying a sealed letter, which
read: ‘Pray remove the bearer from this world; he has tried to violate my wife, your daughter.’
b. Iobates, equally loth to ill-treat a royal guest, asked Bellerophon to do him the service
of destroying the Chimaera, a fire-breathing she-monster with lion’s head, goat’s body, and
serpent’s tail. ‘She is’, he explained, ‘a daughter of Echidne, whom my enemy, the King of
Caria, has made a household pet.’ Before setting about this task, Bellerophon consulted the
seer Polyeidus, and was advised to catch and tame the winged horse Pegasus, beloved by the
Muses of Mount Helicon, for whom he had created the well Hippocrene by stamping his
moon-shaped hoof.
c. Pegasus was absent from Helicon, but Bellerophon found him drinking at Peirene, on
the Acropolis of Corinth, another of his wells; and threw over his head a golden bridle,
Athene’s timely present. But some say that Athene gave Pegasus already bridled to Bellerophon; and others, that Poseidon, who was really Bellerophon’s father, did so. Be that
as it may, Bellerophon overcame the Chimaera by flying above her on Pegasus’s back,
riddling her with arrows, and then thrusting between her jaws a lump of lead which he had
fixed to the point of his spear. The Chimaera’s fiery breath melted the lead, which trickled
down her throat, searing her vitals.
d. Iobates, however, far from rewarding Bellerophon for this daring feat, sent him at once
against the warlike Solymians and their allies, the Amazons; both of whom he conquered by
soaring above them, well out of bow-shot, and dropping large boulders on their heads. Next,
in the Lycian Plain of Xanthus, he beat off a band of Carian pirates led by one Cheimarrhus, a
fiery and boastful warrior, who sailed in a ship adorned with a lion figurehead and a serpent
stern. When Iobates showed no gratitude even then but, on the contrary, sent the palace
guards to ambush him on his return, Bellerophon dismounted and prayed that, while he
advanced on foot, Poseidon would flood the Xanthian Plain behind him. Poseidon heard his
prayer, and sent great waves rolling slowly forward as Bellerophon approached Iobates’s
palace; and, because no man could persuade him to retire, the Xanthian women hoisted their
skirts to the waist and came rushing towards him full butt, offering themselves to him one and
all, if only he would relent. Bellerophon’s modesty was such that he turned tail and ran; and
the waves retreated with him.
e. Convinced now that Proetus must have been mistaken about the attempt on Anteia’s
virtue, Iobates produced the letter, and demanded an exact account of the affair. On learning
the truth, he implored Bellerophon’s forgiveness, gave him his daughter Philonoë in marriage,
and made him heir to the Lycian throne. He also praised the Xanthian women for their
resourcefulness and ordered that, in future, all Xanthians should reckon descent from the
mother, not the father.
f. Bellerophon, at the height of his fortune, presumptuously undertook a flight to Olympus,
as though he were an immortal; but Zeus sent a gadfly, which stung Pegasus under the tail,
making him rear and fling Bellerophon ingloriously to earth. Pegasus completed the flight to
Olympus, where Zeus now uses him as a pack-beast for thunderbolts; and Bellerophon, who
had fallen into a thorn-bush, wandered about the earth, lame, blind, lonely and accursed,
always avoiding the paths of men, until death overtook him.


ANTIOPE

SOME say that when Zeus seduced Antiope, daughter of Nycteus the Theban, she fled to
the King of Sicyon, who agreed to marry her, and thus occasioned a war in which Nycteus
was killed. Antiope’s uncle Lycus presently defeated the Sicyonians in a bloody battle and
brought her back, a widow, to Thebes. After giving birth in a wayside thick to the twins
Amphion and Zethus, whom Lycus at once exposed at Mount Cithaeron, she was cruelly ill-
treated for many years by her aunt, Dirce. At last, she contrived to escape from the prison in
which she was immured, and fled to the hut where Amphion and Zethus, whom a passing
cattle-man had rescued, were now living. But they mistook Antiope for a runway slave, and refused to shelter her. Dirce then came rushing up in a Bacchic frenzy, seized hold of Antiope,
and dragged her away.
‘My lads,’ cried the cattle-man, ‘you had better beware of the Furies.’
‘Why the Furies?’ they asked.
‘Because you have refused to protect your mother, who is now being carried off for
execution by that savage aunt of hers.’
The twins at once went in pursuit, rescued Antiope, and tied Dirce by the hair to the horns
of a wild bull, which made short work of her.
b. Others say that the river Asopus was Antiope’s father, and that one night the King of
Sicyon impersonated Lycus, to whom she was married, and seduced her. Lycus divorced
Antiope in consequence and married Dirce, thus leaving Zeus free to court the lonely Antiope,
and get her with child. Dirce, suspecting that this was Lycus’s doing, imprisoned Antiope in a
dark dungeon; from which, however, she was freed by Zeus just in time to bring forth
Amphion and Zethus on Mount Cithaeron. The twins grew up among the cattle-men with
whom Antiope had taken refuge and, when they were old enough to understand how unkindly
their mother had been treated, she persuaded them to avenge her. They met Dirce roaming the
slopes of Mount Cithaeron in a Bacchic frenzy, tied her by the hair to the horns of a wild bull
and, when she was dead, flung her body on the ground; where a spring welled up, afterwards
called the Dircaean Stream. But Dionysus avenged this murder of his votary: he sent Antiope
raging madly all over Greece until at last Phocus, a grandson of Sisyphus, cured and married
her in Phocis.
c. Amphion and Zethus visited Thebes, where they expelled King Laius and built the
lower city, Cadmus having already built the upper. Now, Zethus had often taunted Amphion
for his devotion to the lyre given him by Hermes. ‘It distracts you’, he would say, ‘from
useful work.’ Yet when they became masons, Amphion’s stones moved to the sound of his
lyre and gently slid into place, while Zethus was obliged to use main force, lagging far behind
his brother. The twins ruled jointly in Thebes, where Zethus married Thebe, after whom the
city—previously known as Cadmeia—is now named; and Amphion married Niobe. But all
her children except two were shot dead by Apollo and Artemis, whose mother Leto she had
insulted. Amphion was himself killed by Apollo for trying to take vengeance on the Delphic
priests, and further punished in Tartarus. Amphion and Zethus are buried in one grave at
Thebes, which is guarded carefully when the sun is in Taurus; for then the people of Phocian
Tithorea try to steal earth from the mound and place it on the grave of Phocus and Antiope.
An oracle once said that this act would increase the fertility of all Phocis at the expense of
Thebes.


NIOBE

NIOBE, sister of Pelops, had married Amphion, King of Thebes an borne him seven sons
and seven daughters, of whom she was so inordinately proud that, one day, she disparaged
Leto herself for having only two children: Apollo and Artemis. Manto, the prophetic daughter
of Teiresias, overhearing this rash remark, advised the Theban women to placate Leto and her
children at once: burning frank-incense and wreathing their hair with laurel branches. When
the scent of incense was already floating in the air, Niobe appeared, followed by a throng of
attendants and dressed in a splendid Phrygian robe, her long hair flowing loose. She
interrupted the sacrifice and furiously asked why Leto, a woman of obscure parentage, with a
mannish daughter and a womanish son, should be preferred to her, Niobe, grandchild of Zeus
and Atlas, the dread of the Phrygians, and a queen of Cadmus’s royal house? Though fate or
ill-luck might carry off two or three of her children, would she not still remain the richer?
b. Abandoning the sacrifice, the terrified Theban women tried to placate Leto with
murmured prayers, but it was too late. She had already sent Apollo and Artemis, armed with
bows, to punish Niobe’s presumption. Apollo found the boys hunting on Mount Cithaeron
and shot them down one by one, sparing only Amyclas, who had wisely offered a propitiatory
prayer to Leto. Artemis found the girls spinning in the palace and, with a quiverful of arrows,
despatched all of them, except Meliboëa, who had followed Amyclas’s example. These two
survivors hastened to build Leto a temple, though Meliboëa had turned so pale with fear that
she was still nicknamed Chloris when she married Neleus some years later. But some say that
none of Niobe’s children survived, and that her husband Amphion was also killed by Apollo.
c. For nine days and nine nights Niobe bewailed her dead, and found no one to bury them,
because Zeus, taking Leto’s part, had turned all the Thebans into stone. On the tenth day, the
Olympians themselves deigned to conduct the funeral. Niobe fled overseas to Mount Sipylus,
the home of her father Tantalus, where Zeus, moved by pity, turned her into a statue which
can still be seen weeping copiously in the early summer.
d. All men mourned for Amphion, deploring the extinction of his race, but none mourned
for Niobe, except her equally proud brother Pelops.


THE CALYDONIAN BOAR

OENEUS, King of Calydon in Aetolia, married Althaea. She first bore him Toxeus, whom
Oeneus killed with his own hands for rudely leaping over the fosse which had been dug in
defence of the city; and then Meleager, said to have been, in reality, her son by Ares. When
Meleager was seven days old, the Fates came to Althaea’s bedroom am announced that he
could live only so long as a certain brand on the hearth remained unburned. She at once
snatched the brand from the fire, extinguishing it with a pitcherful of water, and then hid it in
a chest.
b. Meleager grew up to be a bold and invulnerable fighter, and the best javelin-thrower in
Greece, as he proved at Acastus’s funeral games. He might still be alive but for an
indiscretion committed by Oeneus who, one summer, forgot to include Artemis in his yearly
sacrifices to the twelve gods of Olympus. Artemis, when informed of this neglect by Helius,
sent a huge boar to kill Oeneus’s cattle and labourers, and to ravage his crops; but Oeneus
despatched heralds, inviting all the bravest fighters of Greece to hunt the boar, and promising
that whoever killed it should have its pelt and tusks.
c. Many answered the call, among them Castor and Polydeuces from Sparta; Idas and
Lynceus from Messene; Theseus from Athens and Peirithous from Larissa; Jason from Iolcus
and Admetus from Pherae; Nestor from Pylus; Peleus and Eurytion from Phthia; Iphicles
from Thebes; Amphiaraus from Argos; Telamon from Salamis; Caeneus from Magnesia; and
finally Ancaeus and Cepheus from Arcadia, followed by their compatriot, the chaste, swift-
footed Atalanta, only daughter of Iasus and Clymene. Iasus had wished for a male heir and
Atalanta’s birth disappointed him so cruelly that he exposed her on the Parthenian Hill near
Calydon, where she was suckled by a bear which Artemis sent to her aid. Atalanta grew to
womanhood among a clan of hunters who found and reared her, but remained a virgin, and
always carried arms. On one occasion she came fainting from thirst to Cyphanta and there,
calling on Artemis, and striking a rock with the point of her spear, made a spring of water
gush out. But she was not yet reconciled to her father.
d. Oeneus entertained the huntsmen royally for nine days; and though Ancaeus and
Cepheus at first refused to hunt in company with a woman, Meleager declared, on Oeneus’s
behalf, that unless they withdrew their objection he would cancel the chase altogether. The
truth was that Meleager had married Idas’s daughter Cleopatra, but now felt a sudden love for
Atalanta and wished to ingratiate himself with her. His uncles, Althaea’s brothers, took an
immediate dislike to the girl, convinced that her presence could lead only to mischief, because
he kept sighing deeply and exclaiming: ‘Ah, how happy the man whom she marries her’ Thus
the chase began under bad auspices; Artemis herself had seen to this.
e. Amphiaraus and Atalanta were armed with bows and arrows; others with boar-spears,
javelins, or axes, each being so anxious to win the pelt for himself that hunt discipline was
neglected. At Meleager’s, suggestion, the company advanced in a half-moon, at some paces
interval, through the forest where the boar had its lair.
f. The first blood shed was human. When Atalanta posted herself on the extreme right
flank at some distance from her fellow-hunters, two Centaurs, Hylaeus and Rhaecus, who had
joined the chase, decided to ravish her, each in turn assisting the other. But as soon as they ran
towards her, she shot them both down and went to hunt at Meleager’s side.
g. Presently the boar was flushed from a water-course overgrown with willows. It came
bounding out, killed two of the hunters, hamstrung another, and drove young Nestor, who
afterwards fought at Troy, up a tree. Jason and several others flung ill-aimed javelins at the
boar, Iphicles alone contriving to graze its shoulder. Then Telamon and Peleus went in boldly
with boar-spears; but Telamon tripped over a tree root and, while Peleus was pulling him to his feet, the boar saw them and charged. Atalanta let fly a timely arrow, which sank in behind
the ear, and sent it scurrying off. Ancaeus sneered: ‘That is no way to hunt! Watch me!’ He
swung his battle-axe at the boar as it charged, but was not quick enough; the next instant he
lay castrated and disembowelled. In his excitement, Peleus killed Eurytion with a javelin
aimed at the boar, which Amphiaraus had succeeded in blinding with an arrow. Next, it
rushed at Theseus, whose javelin flew wide; but Meleager also flung and transfixed its right
flank, and then, as the boar whirled around in pain, trying to dislodge the missile, drove his
hunting-spear deep under its left shoulder-blade to the heart. The boar fell dead at last. At
once, Meleager flayed it, and presented the pelt to Atalanta, saying: ‘You drew first blood,
and had we left the beast alone it would soon have succumbed to your arrow.’
b. His uncles were deeply offended. The eldest, Plexippus, argued that Meleager had won
the pelt himself and that, on his refusal, it should have gone to the most honourable person
present—namely himself, as Oeneus’s brother-in-law. Plexippus’s younger brother supported
him with the contention that Iphicles, not Atalanta, had drawn first blood. Meleager, in a
lover’s rage, killed them both.
i. Althaea, as she watched the dead bodies being carried home, set a curse upon Meleager;
which prevented him from defending Calydon when his two surviving uncles declared war on
the city and killed many of its defenders. At last his wife Cleopatra persuaded him to take up
arms, and he killed both these uncles, despite their support by Apollo; whereupon the Furies
instructed Althaea to take the unburned brand from the chest and cast it on the fire. Meleager
felt a sudden scorching of his inwards, and the enemy overcame him with ease. Althaea and
Cleopatra hanged themselves, and Artemis turned all but two of Meleager’s shrieking sisters
into guinea-hens, which she brought to her island of Leros, the home of evil-livers.
j. Delighted by Atalanta’s success, Iasus recognized her at last as his daughter; but when
she arrived at the palace his first words were: ‘My child, prepare to take a husband!’—a
disagreeable announcement, since the Delphic Oracle had warned her against marriage. She
answered: ‘Father, I consent on one condition. Any suitor for my hand must either beat me in
a foot race, or else let me kill him.’ ‘So be it,’ said Iasus.
k. Many unfortunate princes lost their lives in consequence, because she was the swiftest
mortal alive; but Melanion, a son of Amphidamas the Arcadian, invoked Aphrodite’s
assistance. She gave him three golden apples, saying: ‘Delay Atalanta by letting these fall,
one after the other, in the course of the race.’ The stratagem was successful. Atalanta stooped
to pick up each apple in turn and reached the winning-post just behind Melanion.
l. The marriage took place, but the Oracle’s warning was justified because, one day, as
they passed by a precinct of Zeus, Melanion persuaded Atalanta to come inside and lie with
him there. Vexed that his precinct had been defiled, Zeus changed them both into lions: for
lions do not mate with lions, but only with leopards, and they were thus prevented from ever
again enjoying each other. This was Aphrodite’s punishment first for Atalanta’s obstinacy in
remaining a virgin, and then for her lack of gratitude in the matter of the golden apples. But
some say that before this Atalanta had been untrue to Melanion and borne Meleager a child
called Parthenopaeus, whom she exposed on the same hill where the she-bear had suckled her.
He too survived and afterwards defeated Idas in Ionia and marched with the Seven
Champions against Thebes. According to others, Ares, not Meleager, was Parthenopaeus’s
father; Atalanta’s husband was not Melanion but Hippomenes; and she was the daughter of
Schoeneus, who ruled Boeotian Onchestus. It is added that she and he prophaned a sanctuary
not of Zeus but of Cybele, who turned them into lions and yoked them to her chariot.


ARISTAEUS

HYPSEUS, a high-king of the Lapiths, whom the Naiad Creusa bore to the River-god
Peneius, married Chlidanope, another Naiad, and had by her a daughter, Cyrene. Cyrene
despised spinning, weaving, and similar household tasks; instead, she would hunt wild beasts
on Mount Pelion all day and half the night, explaining that her father’s flocks and herds
needed protection. Apollo once watched her wrestling with a powerful lion; he summoned
King Cheiron the Centaur to witness the combat (from which Cyrene, as usual, emerged
triumphant) asking her name, and whether she would make him a suitable bride. Cheiron
laughed. He was aware that Apollo not only knew her name, but had already made up his
mind to carry her off, either when he saw her guarding Hypseus’s flocks by the river Peneius,
or when she received two hunting dogs from his hands as a prize for winning the foot race at
Pelias’s funeral games.
b. Cheiron further prophesied that Apollo would convey Cyrene overseas to the richest
garden of Zeus, and make her the queen of a great city, having first gathered an island people
about a hill rising from a plain. Welcomed by Ulbya to a golden palace, she would win a
queendom equally beneficent to hunters and farmers, and there bear him a son. Hermes would
act as man-midwife and carry the child, called Aristeus, or Aristaeus, to the enthroned Hours
and Mother Earth, bidding them feed him on nectar and ambrosia. When Aristaeus grew to
manhood, he would win the titles of ‘Immortal Zeus’, ‘Pure Apollo’, and ‘Guardian of the
Flocks’.
c. Apollo duly took Cyrene away in his golden chariot, to the site of what is now the city
of Cyrene; Aphrodite was waiting to greet their arrival, and bedded them without delay in
Libya’s golden chamber. That evening Apollo promised Cyrene a long life in which to
indulge her passion for hunting and reign over a fertile country. He then left her to the care of
certain Myrtle-nymphs, children of Hermes, on the near-by hills, where she bore Aristaeus
and, after a second visit from Apollo, Idmon the seer. But she also lay with Ares one night,
and bore him the Thracian Diomedes, owner of the man-eating mares.
d. The Myrtle-nymphs, nicknaming Aristaeus ‘Agreus’ and ‘Nomius’, taught him how to
curdle milk for cheese, build bee-hives, and make the oleaster yield the cultivated olive. These
useful arts he passed on to others, who gratefully paid him divine honours. From Ulbya he
sailed to Boeotia, after which Apollo led him to Cheiron’s cave for instruction in certain
Mysteries.
e. When Aristaeus had grown to manhood, the Muses married him to Autonoë, by whom
he became the father of the ill-fated Actaeon, and of Macris, nurse to Dionysus. They also
taught him the art of healing and prophecy, and set him to watch over their sheep which
grazed across the Athamantian Plain of Phthia, and about Mount Othrys, and in the valley of
the river Apidanus. It was here that Aristaeus perfected the art of hunting, taught him by
Cyrene.
f. One day he went to consult the Delphic Oracle, and was told to visit the island of Ceos,
where he would be greatly honoured. Setting sail at once, Aristaeus found that the scorching
Dog-star had caused a plague among the islanders, in vengeance of Icarius whose secret
murderers were sheltering among them. Aristaeus summoned the people, raised a great altar
in the mountains, and offered sacrifices on it to Zeus, at the same time propitiating the Dog-
star by putting the murderers to death. Zeus was gratified and ordered the Etesian Winds, in
future, to cool Greece and its adjacent islands for forty days from the Dog-star’s rising. Thus
the plague ceased, and the Ceans not only showered Aristaeus with gratitude, but still
continue to propitiate the Dog-star every year before its appearance.
g. He then visited Arcadia and, later, settled at Tempe. But there all his bees died and,
greatly distressed, he went to a deep pool in the rive Peneius where he knew that Cyrene
would be staying with her Naiad sisters. His aunt, Arethusa, heard an imploring voice through
the water; put out her head, recognized Aristaeus, and invited him down to the wonderful
palace of the Naiads. These washed him with water drawn from a perpetual spring and, after a
sacrificial feast, he was advised by Cyrene: ‘Bind my cousin Proteus, and force him to explain
why your bees sickened.’
h. Proteus was taking his midday rest in a cave on the island Pharos, sheltering from the
heat of the Dog-star, and Aristaeus, having overcome him, despite his changes, learned that
the bees’ sickness was his punishment for having caused Eurydice’s death; and it was true
that when he had made love to her on the river-bank near Tempe, she had fled from him and
been bitten by a serpent.
i. Aristaeus now returned to the Naiads’ palace, where Cyrene instructed him to raise four
altars in the woods to the Dryads, Eurydice’s companions, and sacrifice four young bulls and
four heifers; then to pour a libation of blood, leaving the carcasses where they lay and finally
to return in the morning, nine days later, bringing poppies of forgetfullness, a fatted calf, and
a black ewe to propitiate the ghost of Orpheus, who had now joined Eurydice below.
Aristaeus obeyed and, on the ninth morning, a swarm of bees rose from the rotting carcasses
and settled on a tree. He captured the swarm, which he put into a hive; and the Arcadians now
honour him as Zeus for having taught them this method of raising new swarms of bees.
j. Later, distressed by the death of his son Actaeon, which arose in him a hatred of Boeotia,
he sailed with his followers to Libya, where he asked Cyrene for a fleet in which to emigrate.
She gladly complied, and soon he was at sea again, making north-westward. Enchanted by the
savage beauty of Sardinia, his first landfall, he began to cultivate it and, having begotten two
sons there, was presently joined by Daedalus; but is said to have founded no city there.
k. Aristaeus visited other distant islands, and spent some years in Sicily, where he
received divine honours, especially from the olive-growers. Finally he went to Thrace, and
supplemented his education by taking part in the Mysteries of Dionysus. After living for a
while near Mount Haemus, and founding the city of Aristaeum, he disappeared without trace,
and is now worshipped as a god both by the Thracian barbarians and by civilized Greeks.


MIDAS

MIDAS, son of the Great Goddess of Ida, by a satyr whose name is not remembered, was
a pleasure-loving King of Macedonian Bromium, where he ruled over the Brigians (also
called Moschians) and planted his celebrated rose gardens. In his infancy, a procession of ants
was observed carrying grains of wheat up the side of his cradle and placing them between his
lips as he slept—a prodigy which the soothsayers read as an omen of the great wealth that
would accrue to him; and when he grew older, Orpheus tutored him.
b. One day, the debauched old satyr Silenus, Dionysus’s former pedagogue, happened to
straggle from the main body of the riotous Dionysian army as it marched out of Thrace into
Boeotia, and was found sleeping off his drunken fit in the rose gardens. The gardeners bound
him with garlands of flowers and led him before Midas, to whom he told wonderful tales of
an immense continent lying beyond the Ocean stream-altogether separate from the conjoined
mass of Europe, Asia, or Africa—where splendid cities abound, peopled by gigantic, happy,
and long-lived inhabitants, and enjoying a remarkable legal system. A great expedition—at
least ten million strong—once set out thence across the Ocean in ships to visit the
Hyperboreans; but on learning that theirs was the best land that the old world had to offer,
retired in disgust. Among other wonders, Silenus mentioned a frightful whirlpool beyond
which no traveller may pass. Two streams flow close by, and trees growing on the banks of
the first bear fruit that causes those who eat it to weep and groan and pine away. But fruit
growing by the other Stream renews the youth even of the very aged: in fact, after passing
backwards through middle age, young manhood, and adolescence, they become children
again, then infants—and finally disappear! Midas, enchanted by Silenus’s fictions, entertained
him for five days and nights, and then ordered a guide to escort him to Dionysus’s
headquarters.
c. Dionysus, who had been anxious on Silenus’s account, sent to ask how Midas wished to
be rewarded. He replied without hesitation: ‘Pray grant that all I touch be turned into gold.’
However, not only stones, flowers, and the furnishings of his house turned to gold but, when
he sat down to table, so did the food he ate and the water drank. Midas soon begged to be
released from his wish, because he was fast dying of hunger and thirst; whereupon Dionysus,
highly entertained, told him to visit the source of the river Pactolus, near Mount Tmolus, and
there wash himself. He obeyed, and was at once freed from the golden touch, but the sands of
the river Pactolus are bright with gold to this day.
d. Midas, having thus entered Asia with his train of Brigians, was adopted by the childless
Phrygian King Gordius. While only a poor peasant, Gordius had been surprised one day to see
a royal eagle perch on the pole of his ox-cart. Since it seemed prepared to settle there all day,
he drove the team towards Phrygian Telmissus, now a part of Galatia, where there was a
reliable oracle; but at the gate of the city he met a young prophetess who, when she saw the
eagle still perched on the pole, insisted on his offering immediate sacrifices to Zeus the King.
‘Let me come with you, peasant,’ she said, ‘to make sure that you choose the correct victims.’
‘By all means,’ replied Gordius. ‘You appear to be a wise and considerate young woman. Are
you prepared to marry me?’ ‘As soon as the sacrifices have been offered,’ she answered.
e. Meanwhile, the King of Phrygia had died suddenly, without issue, and an oracle
announced: ‘Phrygians, your new king is approaching with his bride, seated in an ox-cart!’
When the ox-cart entered the market place of Telmissus, the eagle at once attracted popular
attention, and Gordius was unanimously acclaimed king. In gratitude, he dedicated the cart to
Zeus, together with its yoke, which he had knotted to the pole in a peculiar manner. An oracle
then declared that whoever discovered how to untie the knot would become the lord of all
Asia. Yoke and pole were consequently laid up in the Acropolis at Gordium, a city which
Gordius had founded, where the priests of Zeus guarded them jealously for centuries—until
Alexander the Macedonian petulantly cut the knot with his sword.
f. After Gordius’s death, Midas succeeded to the throne, promoted the worship of
Dionysus, and founded the city of Ancyra. The Brigians who had come with him became
known as Phrygians, and the kings of Phrygia are alternately named Midas and Gordius to
this day; so that the first Midas is now mistakenly described as a son of Gordius.
g. Midas attended the famous musical contest between Apollo and Marsyas, umpired by
the River-god Tmolus. Tmolus awarded the prize to Apollo who, when Midas dissented from
the verdict, punished him with a pair of ass’s ears. For a long time, Midas managed to conceal
these under a Phrygian cap; but his barber, made aware of the deformity, found it impossible
to keep the shameful secret close, as Midas had enjoined him to do on pain of death. He
therefore dug a hole in the river-bank and, first making sure that nobody was about,
whispered into it: ‘King Midas has ass’s ears!’ Then he filled up the hole, and went away, at
peace with himself until a reed sprouted from the bank and whispered the secret to all who
passed. When Midas learned that his disgrace had become public knowledge, he condemned
the barber to death, drank bull’s blood, and perished miserably.


DAEDALUS AND TALOS

a. The parentage of Daedalus is disputed. His mother is named Alcippe by some; by
others, Merope; by still others, Iphinoë; and all give him a different father, though it is generally agreed that he belonged to the royal house of Athens, which claimed descent from
Erechtheus. He was a wonderful smith, having been instructed in his art by Athene herself.
One of his apprentices, Talos the son of his sister Polycaste, or Perdix, had already
surpassed him in craftsmanship while only twelve years old. Talos happened one day to pick
up the jawbone of a serpent or, some say, of a fish’s spine; and, finding that he could use it to
cut a stick in half, copied it in iron and thereby invented the saw. This, and other inventions of
his – such as the potter’s wheel, and the compass for marking out circles – secured him a
great reputation at Athens, and Daedalus, who claimed himself to have forged the first saw,
soon grew unbearably jealous. Leading Talos up to the roof of Athene’s temple on the
Acropolis, he pointed out certain distant sights, and suddenly toppled him over the edge. Yet,
for all his jealousy, he would have done Talos no harm had he not suspected him of
incestuous relations with his mother Polycaste. Daedalus then hurried down to the foot of the
Acropolis, and thrust Talos’s corpse into a bag, proposing to bury it secretly. When
challenged by passers—by, he explained that he had piously taken up a dead serpent, as the
law required – which was not altogether untrue, Talos being an Erechtheid – but there were
bloodstains on the bag, and his crime did not escape detection, whereupon the Areiopagus
banished him for murder. According to another account he fled before the trial could take
place.
c. Now, the soul of Talos – whom some call Calus, Circinus, or Tantalus – flew off in
the form of a partridge, but his body was buried where it had fallen. Polycaste hanged herself
when she heard of his death, and the Athenians built a sanctuary in her honour beside the
Acropolis.
d. Daedalus took refuge in one of the Attic demes, whose people are named Daedalids
after him; and then in Cretan Cnossus, where King Minos delighted to welcome so skilled a
craftsman. He lived there for some time, at peace and in high favour, until Minos, learning
that he had helped Pasiphaë to couple with Poseidon’s white bull, locked him up for a while
in the Labyrinth, together with his son Icarus, whose mother, Naucrate, was one of Minos’s
slaves; but Pasiphaë freed them both.
e. It was not easy, however, to escape from Crete, since Minos kept all his ships under
military guard, and now offered a large reward for his apprehension. But Daedalus made a
pair of wings for himself, and another for Icarus, the quill feathers of which were threaded
together, but the smaller ones held in place by wax. Having tied on Icarus’s pair for him, he
said with tears in his eyes: ‘My son, be warned! Neither soar too high, lest the sun melt the
wax; nor swoop too low, lest the feathers be wetted by the sea.’ Then he slipped his arms into
his own pair of wings and they flew off. ‘Follow me closely,’ he cried, ‘do not set your own
course!’
f. They had left Naxos, Delos, and Paros behind them on the left hand, and were
leaving Lebynthos and Calymne behind on the right, when Icarus disobeyed his father’s
instructions and began soaring towards the sun, rejoiced by the lift of his great sweeping
wings. Presently, when Daedalus looked over his shoulder, he could no longer see Icarus; but
scattered feathers floated on the waves below. The heat of the sun had melted the wax, and
Icarus had fallen into the sea and drowned. Daedalus circled around, until the corpse rose to
the surface, and then carried it to the near—by island now called Icaria, where he buried it. A
partridge sat perched on a holm—oak and watched him, chattering for delight – the soul of his
sister Polycaste, at last avenged. This island has now given its name to the surrounding sea.
g. But some, disbelieving the story, say that Daedalus fled from Crete in a boat
provided by Pasiphaë; and that, on their way to Sicily, they were about to disembark at a
small island, when Icarus fell into the sea and drowned. They add that it was Heracles who
buried Icarus; in gratitude for which, Daedalus made so lifelike a statue of him at Pisa that
Heracles mistook it for a rival and felled it with a stone. Others say that Daedalus invented sails, not wings, as a means of outstripping Minos’s galleys; and that Icarus, steering
carelessly, was drowned when their boat capsized.
h. Daedalus flew westward until, alighting at Cumae near Naples, he dedicated his
wings to Apollo there, and built him a golden—roofed temple. Afterwards, he visited
Camicus in Sicily, where he was hospitably received by King Cocalus, and lived among the
Sicilians, enjoying great fame and erecting many fine buildings.
i. Meanwhile, Minos had raised a considerable fleet, and set out in search of Daedalus.
He brought with him a Triton shell, and wherever he went promised to reward anyone who
could pass a linen thread thorough it: a problem which, he knew, Daedalus alone would be
able to solve. Arrived at Camicus, he offered the shell to Cocalus, who undertook to have it
threaded; and, sure enough, Daedalus found out how to do this. Fastening a gossamer thread
to an ant, he bored a hole at the point of the shell and lured the ant up the spirals by smearing
honey on the edges of the hole. Then he tied the linen thread to the other end of the gossamer
and drew that through as well. Cocalus returned the threaded shell, claiming the reward, and
Minos, assured that he had at last found Daedalus’s hiding—place, demanded his surrender.
But Cocalus’s daughters were loth to lose Daedalus, who made them such beautiful toys, and
with his help they concocted a plot. Daedalus led a pipe through the roof of the bathroom,
down which they poured boiling water or, some say, pitch upon Minos, while he luxuriated in
a warm bath. Cocalus, who may well have been implicated in the plot, returned the corpse to
the Cretans, saying that Minos had stumbled over a rug and fallen into a cauldron of boiling
water.
j. Minos’s followers buried him with great pomp, and Zeus made him a judge of the
dead in Tartarus, with his brother Rhadamanthys and his enemy Aeacus as colleagues. Since
Minos’s tomb occupied the centre of Aphrodite’s temple at Camicus, he was honoured there
for many generations by great crowds of Sicilians who came to worship Aphrodite. In the end,
his bones were returned to Crete by Theron, the tyrant of Acragas.
k. After Minos’s death the Cretans fell into complete disorder, because their main fleet
was burned by the Sicilians. Of the crews who were forced to remain overseas, some built the
city of Minoa, close to the beach where they had landed; others, the city of Hyria in Messapia;
still others, marching into the centre of Sicily, fortified a hill which became the city of Enguos,
so called from a spring which flows close by. There they built a temple of the Mothers, whom
they continued to honour greatly, as in their native Crete.
l. But Daedalus left Sicily to join Iolaus, the nephew and charioteer of Tirynthian
Heracles, who led a body of Athenians and Thespians to Sardinia. Many of his works survive
to this day in Sardinia; they are called Daedaleia [or Daidala].
m. Now, Talos was also the name of Minos’s bull-headed servant, given him by Zeus to
guard Crete. Some say that he survivor of the brazen race who sprang from the ash-trees;
others, that he was forged by Hephaestus in Sardinia, and that he had only one vein, which ran
from his neck down to his ankles, where it was stoppered by a bronze pin. It was his task to
run thrice daily around the island of Crete and throw rocks at any foreign ship; and also to go
thrice a year at a more leisurely pace, through the villages of Crete, announcing Minos’s laws
inscribed on brazen tablets. When the Sardinians tried to invade the island, Talos made
himself red-hot in a fire and destroyed them in his burning embrace, grinning fiercely; hence
the expression ‘Sardonic grin’. In the end, Medea killed Talos by pulling out the vein and
letting his life-blood escape; though some say that Poeas the transfixed him with a poisoned
arrow.


THE BIRTH OF THESEUS

AEGEUS’s first wife was Melite, daughter of Hoples; and his second, Chalcioppe,
daughter of Rhexenor; but neither bore him any children. Ascribing this, and the misfortunes
of his sisters Procne and Philomela, to Aphrodite’s anger, he introduced her worship into
Athens, and then went to consult the Delphic Oracle. The Oracle warned him not to untie the
mouth of his bulging wine-skin until he reached the highest point of Athens, lest he die one
day of grief, a response which Aegeus could not interpret.
b. On his way home he called at Corinth; and here Medea made him swear a solemn oath
that he would shelter her from all enemies if she ever sought refuge at Athens, and undertook
in return to procure him a son by magic. Next, he visited Troezen, where his old comrades
Pittheus and Troezen, sons of Pelops, had recently come from Pisa to share a kingdom with
King Aetius. Aetius was the successor of his father Anthas, son of Poseidon and Alcyone who,
having founded the cities Anthaea and Hyperea, had lately sailed off to found Halicarnass in
Caria. But Aetius seems to have enjoyed little power, because Pittheus, after Troezen’s death,
united Anthaea and Hyperea into a single city, which he dedicated jointly to Athene and
Poseidon, calling Troezen.
c. Pittheus was the most learned man of his age, and one of his most known apothegms on
friendship, is often quoted: ‘Blast not the hope the friendship hath conceived; but fill its measure high!’ He founded sanctuary of Oracular Apollo at Troezen, which is the oldest
surviving shrine in Greece; and also dedicated an altar to the Triple-goddess Themis. Three
white marble thrones, now placed above his tomb behind the temple of Artemis the Saviour,
used to serve him and the others as judgement seats. He also taught the art of oratory in
Muses’ sanctuary at Troezen—which was founded by Hephaestus’s son Ardalus, the reputed
inventor of the flute—and a treatise on rhetoric by his hand is extant.
d. Now, while Pittheus was still living at Pisa, Bellerophon asked to marry his daughter
Aethra, but had been sent away to Caria in disgrace before the marriage could be celebrated;
though still attracted to Bellerophon, she had little hope of his return. Pittheus, therefore,
grieving at her enforced virginity, and influenced by the spell which Medea was casting on all
of them from afar, made Aegeus drunk and sent him to bed with Aethra. Later in the same
night, Poseidon also enjoyed her. For, in obedience to a dream sent by Athene, she left the
drunken Aegeus, and waded across to the island of Sphaeria, which lies close to the mainland
of Troezen, carrying libations to pour at the tomb of Sphaerus, Pelops’s charioteer. There,
with Athene’s guidance, Poseidon overpowered her, and Aethra subsequently changed the
name of the island from Sphaeria to Hiera, and founded on temple of Apaturian Athene,
establishing a rule that girls should henceforth dedicate her girdle to the goddess before
marriage. Poseidon, however, generously conceded to Aegeus the parentage of any child born
to Aethra in the due time.
e. Aegeus, when he awoke and found himself in Aethra’s bed, told her that if a son were
born to them he must not be exposed or sent away, but secretly reared in Troezen. Then he
sailed back celebrate the All-Athenian Festival, after hiding his sword and sandals under a
hollow rock, known as Altar of Strong Zeus, that stood on the road from Troezen to Hermium.
If, when the boy is born, he could move this rock and recover the tokens, he was to be sent
with them to Athens. Meanwhile, Aethra must keep silence, lest Aegeus nephews, the fifty
children of Pallas, plotted against her life. The sword was an heirloom from Cecrops.
f. At a place now called Genethlium, on the way from the city to harbour of Troezen,
Aethra gave birth to a boy. Some say that she at once named him Theseus, because the tokens
had been deposited for him, others that he afterwards won this name at Athens. He was up in
Troezen, where his guardian Pittheus discreetly spread rumour that Poseidon had been his
father; and one Connidas, to the Athenians still sacrifice a ram on the day before the Thesean
Feasts, acted as his pedagogue. But some say that Theseus grew up at Marathon.
g. One day Heracles, dining at Troezen with Pittheus, removed his lion-skin and threw it
over a stool. When the palace children came in, they screamed and fled, all except seven-year-
old Theseus, who ran to take axe from the woodpile, and returned boldly, prepared to attack a
real lion.
h. At the age of sixteen years he visited Delphi, and offered his first shaven hair-clippings
to Apollo. He shaved, however, only the fore of his head, like the Arabians and Mysians, or
like the war-like Euboeans, who thereby deny their enemies any advantage in combat. This
kind of tonsure, and the precinct where he performed the ceremony, are both still called
Thesean. He was now an intelligent and prudent youth; and Aethra, leading him to the rock
underneath which Aegeus had hidden the sword and sandals, told story of his birth. He had no
difficulty in moving the rock, called the ‘Rock of Theseus’, and recovered the tokens. Yet, at
Pittheus’s warnings and his mother’s entreaties, he would not visit Athens by the safe sea
route, but insisted on travelling over by foot, impelled by a desire to emulate the feats of his
cousin-german Heracles, whom he greatly admired.


THE LABOURS OF THESEUS

THESEUS set out to free the bandit-ridden coast road which led from Troezen to Athens.
He would pick no quarrels but take vengeance on all who dared to molest him, making the
punishment fit the crime, as was Heracles’s way. At Epidaurus, Periphetes the cripple waylaid
attacked him. Periphetes, whom some call Poseidon’s son, and others the son of Hephaestus
and Anticleia, owned a huge brazen club, with which he used to kill wayfarers; hence his
nickname Corunetes, or ‘cudgel-man’.
Theseus wrenched the club from his hands and battered him to death. Delighted with its
size and weight, he proudly carried it about ever afterwards; and though he himself had been
able to parry its murderous swing, in his hands it never failed to kill.
b. At the narrowest point of the Isthmus, where both the Corinthian and Saronic Gulfs are
visible, lived Sinis, the son of Pemon; or, some say, of Polypemon and Sylea, daughter of
Corinthus, who claimed to be Poseidon’s bastard. He had been nicknamed Pityocamptes, or
‘pinebender’, because he was strong enough to bend down the tops of pine-trees until they
touched the earth, and would often ask innocent passers-by to help him with this task, but then
suddenly release his hold. As the tree sprang upright again, they were hurled high into the air,
and killed by the fall. Or he would bend down the tops of two neighbouring trees until they
met, and tie one of his victim’s arms to each, so that he was torn asunder when the trees were
released.
e. Theseus wrestled with Sinis, overpowered him, and served him as he had served others.
At this, a beautiful girl ran to hide herself in a thicket of rushes and wild asparagus. He
followed her and, after a long search, found her invoking the plants, promising never to burn
or destroy them if they hid her safely. When Theseus swore not to do her any violence, she
consented to emerge, and proved to be Sinis’s daughter Perigune. Perigune fell in love with
Theseus at sight, forgiving the murder of her hateful father and, in due course, bore him a son,
Melanippus. Afterwards he gave her in marriage to Deioneus the Oechalian. Melanippus’s
son Ioxus emigrated to Caria, where he became the ancestor of the Ioxids, who burn neither
rushes nor wild asparagus, but venerate both.
d. Some, however, say that Theseus killed Sinis many years later, and rededicated the
Isthmian Games to him, although they had been founded by Sisyphus in honour of Melicertes,
the son of Ino.
e. Next, at Crommyum, he hunted and destroyed a fierce and monstrous wild sow, which
had killed so many Crommyonians that they no longer dared plough their fields. This beast,
named after the crone who bred it, was said to be the child of Typhon and Echidne.
f. Following the coast road, Theseus came to the precipitous cliffs rushing sheer from the
sea, which had become a stronghold of the bandit Sciron; some call him a Corinthian, the son
of Pelops, or of Poseidon; others, the son of Henioche and Canethus. Sciron used to seat
himself upon a rock and force passing travellers to wash his feet: when they stooped to the
task he would kick them over the cliff into the sea, where a giant turtle swam about, waiting
to devour them. (Turtles closely resemble tortoises, except that they are larger, and have
flippers instead of feet.) Theseus, refusing to wash Sciron’s feet, lifted him from the rock and
flung him into the sea.
g. The Megareans, however, say that the only Sciron with whom Theseus came in conflict
was an honest and generous prince of Megara, the father of Endeis, who married Aeacus and
bore him Peleus and Telamon; they add, that Theseus killed Sciron after the capture of Eleusis,
many years later, and celebrated the Isthmian Games in his honour under the patronage of
Poseidon.
h. The cliffs of Sciron rise close to the Molurian Rocks, and over them runs Sciron’s
footpath, made by him when he commanded the armies of Megara. A violent north-western
breeze which blows seaward across these heights is called Sciron by the Athenians.
i. Now, sciron means ‘parasol’; and the month of Scirophorionis so called because at the
Women’s Festival of Demeter and Core, on the twelfth day of Scirophorionis, the priest of
Erechtheus carries a white parasol, and a priestess of Athene Sciras carries another in solemn
procession from the Acropolis—for on that occasion the goddess’s image is daubed with
sciras, a sort of gypsum, to commemorate the white image which Theseus made of her after
he had destroyed the Minotaur.
j. Continuing his journey to Athens, Theseus met Cercyon the Arcadian, whom some call
the son of Branchus and the nymph Argiope; others, the son of Hephaestus, or Poseidon. He
would challenge passers-by to wrestle with him and then crush them to death in his powerful
embrace; but Theseus lifted him up by the knees and, to the delight of Demeter, who
witnessed the struggle, dashed him headlong to the ground. Cercyon’s death was
instantaneous. Theseus did not trust to strength so much as to skill, for he had invented the art
of wrestling, the principles of which were not hitherto understood. The Wrestling-ground of
Cercyon is still shown near Eleusis, on the road to Megara, close to the grave of his daughter
Alope, whom Theseus is said to have ravished.
k. On reaching Attic Coridallus, Theseus slew Sinis’s father Polypemon, surnamed
Procrustes, who lived beside the road and had two beds in his house, one small, the other
large. Offering a night’s lodging to travellers, he would lay the short men on the large bed,
and rack them out, to fit it; but the tall men on the small bed, sawing off as much of their legs
as projected beyond it. Some say, however, that he used only one bed, and lengthened or
shortened his lodgers according to its measure. In either case, Theseus served him as he had
served others.


THESEUS IN CRETE

IT is a matter of dispute whether Medea persuaded Aegeus to send Theseus against
Poseidon’s ferocious white bull, or whether it was after her expulsion from Athens that he
undertook the destruction of this fire-breathing monster, hoping thereby to ingratiate himself
further with the Athenians. Brought by Heracles from Crete, let loose on the plain of Argos,
and driven thence across the Isthmus to Marathon, the bull had killed men by the hundred
between the cities of Probalinthus and Tricorynthus, including (some say) Minos’s son
Androgeus. Yet Theseus boldly seized those murderous horns and dragged the bull through
the streets of Athens, and up the steep slope of the Acropolis, where he sacrificed it to Athene,
or to Apollo.
b. As he approached Marathon, Theseus had been hospitably entertained by a needy old
spinster named Hecale, or Hecalene, who vowed ram to Zeus if he came back safely. But she
died before his return, instituted the Hecalesian Rites, to honour her and Zeus Hecalius, which
are still performed today. Because Theseus was no more than a child at this time, Hecale had
caressed him with childish endearment, and is therefore commonly known by the diminutive
Hecalene, as much as Hecale.
c. In requital for the death of Androgeus, Minos gave orders that the should send seven
youths and seven maidens every ninth year—at the close of every Great Year—to the Cretan
Labyrinth, where the Minotaur waited to devour them. This Minotaur, whose name was
Asterius, or Asterion, was the bull-headed monster Pasiphaë had borne to the white bull. Soon
after Theseus’s Athens the tribute fell due for the third time, and he so deeply moved by the
fathers whose children were indicated by lot, that offered himself as one of the victims,
despite Aegeus’s earnest dissuasion. But some say that the lot had fallen on him. According to
others, King Minos came in person with a large fleet to elect victims; his eye lighted on
Theseus who, though a native to Troezen not Athens, volunteered to come on the condition
that if he killed the Minotaur with his bare hands the tribute would be annulled.
d. On the two previous occasions, the ship which conveyed the victims had carried black
sails, but Theseus was confident that the gods were on his side, and Aegeus therefore gave
him a white sail as a signal of success—though some say that it was a red in juice of the kern-
oak berry.
e. When the lots had been cast at the Law Courts, Theseus led his companions to the
shrine of Apollo the Dolphin, and on their behalf, he offered a branch of consecrated olive,
bound with white wool. The mothers brought provisions for the voyage, and told their fables
and heroic tales to hearten them. Theseus, however, replaced two of the maiden victims with a
pair of effeminate youths, of unusual courage and presence of mind. These he ordered to take
warm baths, avoid the rays of the sun, perfume their heads and bodies with unguent oils, and
practise how to talk, gesture, and walk like women. He was thus able to deceive Minos by
passing off as maidens.
f. Phaeax, the ancestor of Phaeacians, among whom he were called Odysseus, stood as
pilot at the prow of the thirty-yard ship in which they sailed, because no Athenian as yet knew
anything about navigation. Some say that the helmsman was Phereclus; but those who name Nausitheus are likely to be right, since Theseus on his return raised monuments to Nausitheus
and Phaeax at Phalerum, the port of departure; and initiated the Festival of Navigators, which
is still celebrated in their honour.
g. The Delphic Oracle had advised Theseus to take Aphrodite as his guide and companion
on the voyage. He therefore sacrificed to her on the strand; and the victim, a she-goat, became
a he-goat death-throes. This prodigy won Aphrodite her title of Epitragia.
h. Theseus sailed on the sixth day of Munychion [April]. Every year on this date the
Athenians still send virgins to the Dolphin Temple, to propitiate Apollo, because Theseus
omitted to do so before taking his leave. The god’s displeasure was shown in a storm, which
forced him to take shelter at Delphi and there offer belated sacrifice
i. When the ship reached Crete some days afterwards, Minos came down to the harbour to
count the victims. Falling in love with one the Athenian maidens-whether it was Periboea
(who became mother of Ajax) or Eriboea, or Phereboea, is not agreed, for these three bore
confusingly similar names—he would have ravished her then there, had Theseus not protested
that it was his duty as Poseidon’s son to defend virgins against outrage by tyrants. Minos,
laughing lewdly replied that Poseidon had never been known to show delicate respect for any
virgins who took his fancy.
‘Ha!’ he cried, ‘prove yourself a son of Poseidon, by retrieving bauble for me!’ So saying,
he flung his golden signet ring into the sea.
‘First prove that you are a son of Zeus’ retorted Theseus.
This Minos did. His prayer: ‘Father Zeus, hear me!’ was at once answered by lightning
and a rap of thunder. Without more ado Theseus dived into the sea, where a large school of
dolphins escorted him honourably down to the palace of the Nereids. Some say that Thetis the
Nereid then gave him the jewelled crown, the wedding gift from Aphrodite, which afterwards
Ariadne wore; others, that Amphitrite the Sea-goddess did so herself, and that she sent the
Nereids swimming in every direction to find the golden ring. At all events, when Theseus
emerged from the sea, he was carrying both the ring and the crown, as Micon has recorded in
his painting on the third wall of Theseus’s temple.
e. Aphrodite had indeed accompanied Theseus: for not only did Periboea and Phereboea
invite the chivalrous Theseus to their beds and were not spurned, but Minos’s own daughter
Ariadne fell in love with him at first sight. ‘I will help you to kill my half-brother, the
Minotaur,’ she secretly promised him, ‘if I may return to Athens with you as your wife.’ This
offer Theseus gladly accepted, and married her. Now, before Daedalus left Crete, he had
given her a magic ball of thread, and instructed her how to enter and Labyrinth. She must
open the entrance door and tie the loose thread to the lintel; the ball would then roll along,
diminishing as it went and making, with devious turns and twists, for the corners where the
Minotaur was lodged. This ball Ariadne gave to Theseus and instructed him to follow it until
he reached the sleeping monster, whom he must seize by the hair and sacrifice to Poseidon.
He then can come back by rolling up the thread into a ball again.
1. That same night Theseus did as he was told; but whether he killed Minotaur with a
sword given him by Ariadne, or with his bare hands, or with his celebrated club, is much
disputed. A sculptured at Amyclae shows the Minotaur bound and led in triumph by Theseus
to Athens; but this is not the generally-accepted story.
m. When Theseus emerged from the Labyrinth, spotted with blood, Ariadne embraced
him passionately, and guided the whole Athenian group to the harbour. For, in the meantime,
the two effeminate-looking youths had killed the guards of the women’s quarters, and
released the virgin victims. They all stole aboard their ship, where Nausitheus and Phaeax
were expecting them, and rowed hastily away. But although Theseus broke in the hulls of
several Cretan ships, to prevent the persecution, alarm sounded and he was forced to fight a
sea-battle in the port before escaping, fortunately without loss, under cover of darkness.
n. Some days later, after disembarking on the island then named Dia, but now known as
Naxos, Theseus left Ariadne asleep on the beach and sailed away. Why he did so must remain
a mystery. Some say that he deserted her in favour of a new mistress, Aegle, daughter of
Panopeus; others that, while wind-bound on Dia, he reflected on the scandal at Athens would
cause. Others again say that Dionysus, appearing to Theseus in a dream, threateningly
demanded Ariadne for himself, and that, when Theseus noticed Dionysus’s fleet bearing
down on Dia, he weighed anchor in sudden terror; Dionysus having cast a spell which made
him forget his promise to Ariadne and even her very existence.
o. Whatever the truth of the matter may be, Dionysus’s priests in Athens affirm that when
Ariadne found herself alone on the deserted shore, she broke into bitter laments, remembering
how she has trembled while Theseus set out to kill her monstrous half-brother, how she had
offered silent vows for his success; and how, through her love of him, she had deserted her
parents and motherland. She now invoked the whole universe for vengeance, and Father Zeus
nodded in assent. Then, gently and sweetly, Dionysus with his merry train of satyrs and
maenads came to Ariadne’s rescue. He married her without delay, setting Thetis’s crown
upon her head, and she bore him many children. Of these only Thoas and Oenopion are
sometimes called Theseus’s sons. The crown, which Dionysus later set among the stars as the
Corona Borealis, was made by Hephaestus off fiery gold and Indian gems, set in the shape of
roses.
p. The Cretans, however, refuse to admit that the Minotaur ever existed, or that Theseus
won Ariadne by clandestine means. They describe the Labyrinth as merely a well-guarded
prison, where Athenian youths and maidens were kept in readiness for Androgeus funeral
games. Some were sacrificed at his tomb; others presented to the prizewinners as slaves. It
happened that Minos’s cruel and arrogant general Taurus had carried all before him, year after
year: winning every event in which he competed, much to the disgust of his rivals. He had
also forfeited Minos’s confidence because he was rumoured to be carrying on an adulterous
affair with Pasiphaë, connived at by Daedalus, and one of her twin sons bore a close
resemblance to him. Minos therefore, gladly granted Theseus’s request for the privilege of
fighting against Taurus. In ancient Crete, women as well as men attended the games, and
Ariadne fell in love with Theseus when, three time succession, she saw him toss the former
champion over his head, pinning his shoulders to the ground. The sight afforded Minos almost
satisfaction: he awarded Theseus the prize, accepted him as his son law, and remitted the cruel
tribute.
q. A traditional Boeotian song confirms this tradition that none of the victims were put to
death. It records that the Cretans sent an offering of their first-born to Delphi, for the most
part children of Crethanised Athenian slaves. The Delphians, however, could not support
these from the resources of their small city, and therefore packed them off to found a colony
at Iapygia in Italy. Later, they settled at Boeotia in Thrace, and the nostalgic cry raised by the
Boeotian maidens: ‘Oh, let us return to Athens!’, gives a constant render of their origin.
r. An altogether different account is given by the Cypriots and others. They say that Minos
and Theseus agreed on oath that no ship except the Argo, commanded by Jason, who had a
commission to clear the sea of pirates—might sail in Greek waters with a crew larger than
five. When Daedalus fled from Crete to Athens, Minos broke this pact by pursuing him with
warships, and thus earned the anger of Poseidon, who had witnessed the oath, and now raised
a storm which drove him to his death in Sicily. Minos’s son Deucalion, inheriting the quarrel,
threatened that unless the Athenians surrendered Daedalus, he would put to death all the
hostages given him by Theseus at the conclusion of the pact. Theseus replied that Daedalus
was his blood-relation, and enquired mildly whether some compromise could not be reached.
He exchanged several letters on the subject with Deucalion, but meanwhile secretly built
warships: some at Thymoetidae, a port off the beaten track, and others at Troezen, where Pittheus had a naval yard about which the Cretans knew nothing. Within a month or two his
flotilla set sail, guided by Daedalus and other fugitives from Crete; and the Cretans mistook
the approaching ships for part of Minos’s lost fleet and gave them a resounding welcome.
Theseus therefore seized the harbour without opposition, and made straight for Cnossus,
where he cut down Deucalion’s guards, and killed Deucalion himself in an inner chamber of
the palace. The Cretan throne then passed to Ariadne, with whom Theseus generously came to
terms; she surrendered the Athenian hostages, and a treaty of perpetual friendship was
concluded between the two nations, sealed by a union of the crowns—in effect, she married
Theseus.
s. After long feasting they sailed together for Athens, but were driven to Cyprus by a
storm. There Ariadne, already with child by Theseus, and fearing that she might miscarry
from sea-sickness, asked to be put ashore at Amathus. This was done, but hardly had Theseus
regained his ship when a violent wind forced the whole fleet out to sea again. The women of
Amathus treated Ariadne kindly, comforting her with letters which, they pretended, had just
arrived from Theseus, who was repairing his ship on the shores of a neighbouring island; and
when she died in childbed, gave her a lavish funeral. Ariadne’s tomb is still shown at
Amathus, in a grove sacred to her as Aridela. Theseus, on his eventual return from the Syrian
coast, was deeply grieved to learn that she had died, and endowed her cult with a large sum of
money. The Cypriots still celebrate Ariadne’s festival on the second day of September, when
a youth lies down in her grove and imitates a travailing woman; and worship two small
statues of her: one in silver, the other in brass, which Theseus left them. They say that
Dionysus, so far from marrying Ariadne, was indignant that she and Theseus had profaned his
Naydan grotto, and complained to Artemis, who killed her in childbed with merciless shafts;
but some say that she hanged herself for fear of Artemis.
t. To resume the history of Theseus: from Naxos he sailed to Delos, and there sacrificed to
Apollo, celebrating athletic games in his honour. It was then that he introduced the novel
custom of crowning the victor with palm-leaves, and placing a palm-stem in his right hand.
He also prudently dedicated to the god a small wooden image of Aphrodite, the work of
Daedalus, which Ariadne had brought from Crete and left aboard his ship—it might have
been the subject of cynical comment by the Athenians. This image, still displayed at Delos,
rests on a square base instead of feet, and is perpetually garlanded.
u. A horned altar stands beside the round lake of Delos. Apollo himself built it, when he
was only four years of age, with the closely compacted horns of countless she-goats killed by
Artemis on Mount Cynthus—his first architectural feat. The foundations of the altar, and its
enclosing walls, are also made entirely of horns; all taken from the same side of the victims—
but whether from the left, or from the right, is disputed. What makes the work rank among the
seven marvels of the world is that neither mortar nor any other colligative has been used. It
was around this altar—or, according to another version, around an altar of Aphrodite, on
which the Daedalic image had been set—that Theseus and his companions danced the Crane,
which consists of labyrinthine evolutions, trod with measured steps to the accompaniment of
harps. The Delians still perform this dance, which Theseus introduced from Cnossus;
Daedalus had built Ariadne a dancing-floor there, marked with a maze pattern in white marble
relief, copied from the Egyptian Labyrinth. When Theseus and his companions performed the
Crane at Cnossus, this was the first occasion on which men and women danced together. Old-
fashioned people, especially sailors, keep up much the same dance in many different cities of
Greece and Asia Minor; so do children in the Italian countryside, and it is the foundation of
the Troy Game.
v. Ariadne was soon revenged on Theseus. Whether in grief for her loss, or in joy at the
sight of the Attic coast, from which he had been kept by prolonged winds, he forgot his
promise to hoist the white sail. Aegeus, who stood watching for him on the Acropolis, where the Temple of the Wingless Victory now stands, sighted the black sail, swooned, and fell
headlong to his death into the valley below. But some say that he deliberately cast himself
into the sea, which was thenceforth named the Aegean.
w. Theseus was not informed of this sorrowful accident until he had completed the
sacrifices vowed to the gods for his safe return; he then buried Aegeus, and honoured him
with a hero-shrine. On the eighth day of Pyanepsion [October], the date of the return from
Crete, loyal Athenians flock down to the seashore, with cooking-pots in which they stew
different kinds of beans—to remind their children how Theseus, having been obliged to place
his crew on very short rations, cooked his remaining provisions in one pot as soon as he
landed, and filled their empty bellies at last. At this same festival a thanksgiving is sung for
the end of hunger, and an olive-branch, wreathed in white wool and hung with the season’s
fruits, is carried to commemorate the one which Theseus dedicated before setting out. Since
this was harvest time, Theseus also instituted the Festival of Grape Boughs, either in gratitude
to Athene and Dionysus, both of whom appeared to him on Naxos, or in honour of Dionysus
and Ariadne. The two bough-bearers represent the youths whom Theseus had taken to Crete
disguised as maidens, and who walked beside him in the triumphal procession after his return.
Fourteen women carry provisions and take part in this sacrifice; they represent the mothers of
the rescued victims, and their task is to tell fables and ancient myths, as these mothers also did
before the ship sailed.
x. Theseus dedicated a temple to Saviour Artemis in the market place at Troezen; and his
fellow-citizens honoured him with a sanctuary while he was still alive. Such families as had
been liable to the Cretan tribute trader took to supply the needful sacrifices; and Theseus
awarded his priesthood to the Phytalids, in gratitude for their hospitality. The vessel in which
he sailed to Crete has made an annual voyage to Delos and back ever since; but has been so
frequently over, hauled and refuted that philosophers cite it as a stock instance, when
discussing the problem of continuous identity.


OEDIPUS

LAIUS, son of Labdacus, married Iocaste, and ruled over Thebes. Grieved by his
prolonged childlessness, he secretly consulted the Delphic Oracle, which informed him that
this seeming misfortune was a blessing, because any child born to Iocaste would become his
murderer. He therefore put Iocaste away, though without offering any reason for his decision,
which caused her such vexation that, having made him drank, she inveigled him into her arms
again as soon as night fell. When, nine months later, Iocaste was brought to bed of a son,
Laius snatched him from the nurse’s arms, pierced his feet with a nail and, binding them
together, exposed him on Mount Cithaeron.
b. Yet the Fates had ruled that this boy should reach a green old age. A Corinthian
shepherd found him, named him Oedipus because his feet were deformed by the nail-wound,
and brought him to Corinth, where King Polybus was reigning at the time.
c. According to another version of the story, Laius did not expose Oedipus on the
mountain, but locked him in a chest, which was lowered into the sea from a ship. This chest
drifted ashore at Sicyon, where Periboea, Polybus’s queen, happened to be on the beach,
supervising her royal laundry-women. She picked up Oedipus, retired to a thicket and
pretended to have been overcome by the pangs of labour. Since the laundry-women were too
busy to notice what she was about, she deceived them all into thinking that he had only just
been born. But Periboea told the truth to Polybus who, also being childless, was pleased to
rear Oedipus as his own son.
One day, taunted by a Corinthian youth with not in the least resembling his supposed
parents, Oedipus went to ask the Delphic Oracle what future lay in store for him. ‘Away from
the shrine, wretch!’ the Pythoness cried in disgust. ‘You will kill your father and marry your
mother!’
d. Since Oedipus loved Polybus and Periboea, and shrank from bringing disaster upon
them, he at once decided against returning to Corinth. But in the narrow defile between
Delphi and Daulis he happened to meet Laius, who ordered him roughly to step off the road
and make way for his betters; Laius, it should be explained, was in a chariot and Oedipus on
foot. Oedipus retorted that he acknowledged no betters except the gods and his own parents.
‘So much the worse for you!’ cried Laius, and ordered his charioteer Polyphontes to
drive on. One of the wheels bruised Oedipus’s foot and, transported by rage he killed
Polyphontes with his spear. Then, flinging Laius on the road entangled in the reins, and
whipping up the team, he made them drag him to death. It was left to the king of Plataeae to
bury both corpses
e. Laius had been on his way to ask the Oracle how he might rid Thebes of the Sphinx.
This monster was a daughter of Typhon an Echidne or, some say, of the dog Orthrus and the Chimaera, and had flown to Thebes from the uttermost part of Ethiopia. She was easily
recognized by her woman’s head, lion’s body, serpent’s tail, and eagle’s wings. Hera had
recently sent the Sphinx to punish Thebes for Laius abduction of the boy Chrysippus from
Pisa and, settling on Mount Phicium, close to the city, she now asked every Theban wayfarer
riddle taught her by the Three Muses: ‘What being, with only one voice, has sometimes two
feet, sometimes three, sometimes four, an is weakest when it has the most?’ Those who could
not solve the riddle she throttled and devoured on the spot, among which unfortunates was
Iocaste’s nephew Haemon, whom the Sphinx made haimon, or ‘bloody’ indeed.
Oedipus, approaching Thebes fresh from the murder of Laius, guessed the answer.
‘Man,’ he replied, ‘because he crawls on all fours as an infant, stands firmly on his two feet in
his youth, and leans upon staff in his old age.’ The mortified Sphinx leaped from Mount
Phicium and dashed herself to pieces in the valley below. At this the grateful Thebans
acclaimed Oedipus king, and he married Iocaste, unaware that she was his mother.
f. Plague then descended upon Thebes, and the Delphic Oracle, when consulted once
more, replied: ‘Expel the murderer of Laius!’ Oedipus, not knowing whom he had met in the
defile, pronounced curse on Laius’s murderer and sentenced him to exile.
g. Blind Teiresias, the most renowned seer in Greece at this time now demanded an
audience with Oedipus. Some say that Athene, who had blinded him for having inadvertently
seen her bathing, was moved by his mother’s plea and, taking the serpent Erichthonius from
her aegis, gave the order: ‘Cleanse Teiresias’s ears with your tongue that he may understand
the language of prophetic birds.’
h. Others say that once, on Mount Cyllene, Teiresias had seen two serpents in the act
of coupling. When both attacked him, he struck at them with his staff, killing the female.
Immediately he was turned into a woman, and became a celebrated harlot; but seven years
later he happened to see the same sight again at the same spot, and this time regained his
manhood by killing the male serpent. Still others say that when Aphrodite and the three
Charites, Pasithea, Cale, and Euphrosyne, disputed as to which of the four was most beautiful,
Teiresias awarded Cale the prize; whereupon Aphrodite turned him into an old woman. But
Cale took him with her to Crete and presented him with a lovely head of hair. Some days later
Hera began reproaching Zeus for his numerous infidelities. He defended them by arguing that,
at any rate, when he did share her couch, she had the more enjoyable time by far.
‘Women, of course, derive infinitely greater pleasure from the sexual act than men,’
he blustered.
‘What nonsense!’ cried Hera. ‘The exact contrary is the case, and well you know it.’
Teiresias, summoned to settle the dispute from his personal experience, answered;
‘If the parts of love—pleasure be counted as ten,
Thrice three go to women, one only to men.’
Hera was so exasperated by Zeus’s triumphant grin that she blinded Teiresias; but Zeus
compensated him with inward sight, and a life extended to seven generations.
i. Teiresias now appeared at Oedipus’s court, leaning on the cornel-wood staff given
him by Athene, and revealed to Oedipus the will of the gods: that the plague would cease only
if a Sown Man died for the sake of the city. Iocaste’s father Menoeceus, one of those who had
risen out of the earth when Cadmus sowed the serpent’s teeth, at once leaped from the walls,
and all Thebes praised his civic devotion.
Teiresias then announced further: ‘Menoeceus did well, and the plague will now cease.
Yet the gods had another of the Sown Men in mind, one of the third generation: for he has
killed his father and married his mother. Know, Queen Iocaste, that it is your husband
Oedipus!’
j. At first, none would believe Teiresias, but his words were soon confirmed by a letter
from Periboea at Corinth. She wrote that the sudden death of King Polybus now allowed her to reveal the circumstances of Oedipus’s adoption; and this she did in damning details. Iocaste
then hanged herself for shame and grief, while Oedipus blinded himself with a pin taken from
her garments.
k. Some say that, although tormented by the Erinnyes, who accuse him of having
brought about his mother’s death, Oedipus continued to reign over Thebes for awhile, until he
fell gloriously in battle. According to others, however, Iocaste’s brother Creon expelled him,
but not before he had cursed Eteocles and Polyneices—who were at once his sons and his
brothers—when they insolently sent him the inferior portion of the sacrificial beast, namely
haunch instead of royal shoulder. They therefore watched dry-eyed as he left the city which
he ha, delivered from the Sphinx’s power. After wandering for many years through country
after country, guided by his faithful daughter Antigone, Oedipus finally came to Colonus in
Attica, where the Erinnyes who have a grove there, hounded him to death, and Theseus buried
his body in the precinct of the Solemn Ones at Athens, lamenting by Antigone’s side.


THE SEVEN AGAINST THEBES

SO many princes visited Argos in the hope of marrying either Aegeia, or Deipyla, the
daughters of King Adrastus, that, fearing to make powerful enemies if he singled out any two
of them as his sons-in-law, he consulted the Delphic Oracle. Apollo’s response was: ‘Yoke to
a two-wheeled chariot the boar and lion which fight in your palace.’
b. Among the less fortunate of these suitors were Polyneices and Tydeus. Polyneices
and his twin Eteocles had been elected co-kings of Thebes after the banishment of Oedipus,
their father. They agreed to reign for alternate years, but Eteocles, to whom the first term fell,
would not relinquish his throne at the end of the year, pleading the evil disposition shown by
Polyneices, and banished him from the city. Tydeus, son of Oeneus of Calydon, had killed his
brother Melanippus when out hunting; though he claimed that this was an accident, it had
been prophesied that Melanippus would kill him, and the Calydonians therefore suspected
him of having tried to forestall his fate, and he was also banished.
c. Now, the emblem of Thebes is a lion, and the emblem of Calydon, a boar; and the
two fugitive suitors displayed these devices on their shields. That night, in Adrastus’s palace,
they began to dispute about the riches and glories of their respective cities, and murder might
have been done, had not Adrastus parted and reconciled them. Then, mindful of the prophecy,
he married Aegeia to Polyneices, and Deipyla to Tydeus, with a promise to restore both
princes to their kingdoms; but said that he would first march against Thebes, which lay nearer.
d. Adrastus mustered his Argive chieftains: Capaneus, Hippomedon, his brother-in-
law Amphiaraus the seer, and his Arcadian ally Parthenopaeus, son of Meleager and Atalanta,
bidding them arm themselves and set out eastward. Of these champions, only one was
reluctant to obey: namely Amphiaraus who, foreseeing that all except Adrastus would die
fighting against Thebes, at first refused to go.
e. It happened that Adrastus had formerly quarrelled with Amphiaraus about Argive
affairs of state, and the two angry men might have killed each other, but for Adrastus’s sister
Eriphyle, who was married to Amphiaraus. Snatching her distaff, she flung herself between
them, knocked up their swords, and made them swear always to abide by her verdict in any
future dispute. Apprised of this oath, Tydeus called Polyneices and said: ‘Eriphyle fears that
she is losing her looks; now, if you were to offer her the magic necklace which was
Aphrodite’s wedding gift to your ancestress Harmonia, Cadmus’s wife, she would soon settle
the dispute between Amphiaraus and Adrastus by compelling him to come with us.’
f. This was discreetly done, and the expedition set out, led by the seven champions:
Polyneices, Tydeus, and the five Argives. But some say that Polyneices did not count as one
of the seven, and add the name of Eteoclus the Argive, a son of Iphis.
g. Their march took them through Nemea, where Lycurgus was king. When they asked
leave to water their troops in his country, Lycurgus consented, and his bond-woman
Hypsipyle guided them to the nearest spring. Hypsipyle was a Lemnian princess, but when the women of Lemnos had sworn to murder all their men in revenge for an injury done them, she
saved the life of her father Thoas: they therefore sold her into slavery, and here she was,
acting as nursemaid to Lycurgus’ son Opheltes. She set the boy down for a moment while she
guided the Argive army to the drinking pool, whereupon a serpent writhed around his limbs
and bit him to death. Adrastus and his men returned from the spring too late to do more than
kill the serpent and bury the boy.
h. When Amphiaraus warned them that this was an ominous sign, they instituted the
Nemean Games in the boy’s honour, calling him Archemorus, which means ‘the beginner of
doom’; and each of the champions had the satisfaction of winning one of the seven events.
The judges at the Nemean Games, which are celebrated every four years, have ever since
worn dark robes in mourning for Opheltes, and the victor’s wreath is plaited of luckless
parsley.
i. Arrived at Cithaeron, Adrastus sent Tydeus as his herald to the Thebans, with a
demand that Eteocles should resign the throne in favour of Polyneices. When this was refused,
Tydeus challenged their chieftains to single combat, one after another, and emerged victorious
from every encounter; soon, no more Thebans dared come forward. The Argives then
approached the city walls, and each of the champions took up his station facing one of the
seven gates.
j. Teiresias the seer, whom Eteocles consulted, prophesied that the Thebans would be
victorious only if a prince of the royal house freely offered himself as a sacrifice to Ares;
whereupon Menoeceus, the son of Creon, killed himself before the gates, much as his
namesake and uncle had leaped headlong from the walls on a previous occasion. Teiresias’s
prophecy was fulfilled: the Thebans were, indeed, defeated in a skirmish and withdrew into
the city; but no sooner had Capaneus set a scaling-ladder against the wall and begun to mount
it, than Zeus struck him dead with a thunderbolt. At this, the Thebans took courage, made a
furious sally, killing three more of the seven champions; and one of their number, who
happened to be named Melanippus, wounded Tydeus in the belly. Athene cherished an
affection for Tydeus and, pitying him as he lay half-dead, hastened to beg an infallible elixir
from her father Zeus, which would have soon set him upon his feet again. But Amphiaraus
hated Tydeus for having forced the Argives to march and, being sharp-witted, ran at
Melanippus and cut off his head. ‘Here is revenge!’ he cried, handing the head to Tydeus.
‘Split open the skull and gulp his brains!’ Tydeus did so, and Athene, arriving at that moment
with the elixir, spilt it on the ground and retired in disgust.
k. Only Polyneices, Amphiaraus, and Adrastus now remained of the seven champions;
and Polyneices, to save further slaughter, offered to decide the succession of the throne by
single combat with Eteocles. Eteocles accepted the challenge and, in the course of a bitter
struggle, each mortally wounded the other. Creon, their uncle, then took command of the
Theban army and routed the dismayed Argives. Amphiaraus fled in his chariot along the
banks of the river Ismenus, and was on the point of being thrust between the shoulders by a
Theban pursuer, when Zeus cleft the earth with a thunderbolt and he vanished from sight,
chariot and all, and now reigns alive among the dead. Baton, his charioteer, went with him.
l. Seeing that the day was lost, Adrastus mounted his winged horse Arion and escaped;
but when, later, he heard that Creon would not permit his dead enemies to be buried, visited
Athens as a suppliant and persuaded Theseus to march against Thebes and punish Creon’s
impiety. Theseus took the city in a surprise attack, imprisoned Creon, and gave the dead
champions’ corpses to their kinsfolk, who heaped a great pyre for them. But Evadne,
Capaneus’s wife, seeing that her husband had been heroised by Zeus’s thunderbolt, would not
be parted from him. Since custom demanded that a lightning-struck man should be buried
apart from the rest, and his grave fenced off, she flung herself on the general pyre, and was
consumed alive.
m. Now, before Theseus’s arrival at Thebes, Antigone, sister of Eteocles and Polyneices, had
disobeyed Creon’s orders by secretly building a pyre and laying Polyneices’s corpse upon it.
Looking out of his palace window, Creon noticed a distant glow which seemed to proceed
from a burning pyre and, going to investigate, surprised Antigone in her act of disobedience.
He summoned his son Haemon, to whom Antigone had been affianced, and ordered him to
bury her alive in Polyneices’s tomb. Haemon feigned readiness to do as he was told but,
instead, married Antigone secretly, and sent her away to live among his shepherds. She bore
him a son who, many years later, came to Thebes, and took part in certain funeral games; but
Creon, who was still King of Thebes, guessed his identity by the serpent mark on his body,
borne by all descendants of Cadmus, and sentenced him to death. Heracles interceded for his
life, but Creon proved obdurate; whereupon Haemon killed both Antigone and himself.


TANTALUS

THE parentage and origin of Tantalus are disputed. His mother was Pluto, a daughter
of Cronus and Rhea or, some say, of Oceanus and Tethys; and his father either Zeus, or
Tmolus, the oak-chapleted deity of Mount Tmolus who, with his wife Omphale, ruled over
the kingdom of Lydia and had judged the contest between Pan and Apollo. Some, however,
call Tantalus a king of Argos, or of Corinth; and others say that he went northward from
Sipylus in Lydia to reign in Paphlagonia; whence, after he had incurred the wrath of the gods,
he was expelled by Ilus the Phrygian, whose young brother Ganymedes he had abducted and
seduced.
b. By his wife Euryannassa, daughter of the River-god Pactolus; or by Eurythemista,
daughter of the River-god Xanthus; or by Clytia, daughter of Amphidamantes; or by the
Pleiad Dione, Tantalus became the father of Pelops, Niobe, and Broteas. Yet some call Pelops
a bastard, or the son of Atlas and the nymph Linos.
c. Tantalus was the intimate friend of Zeus, who admitted him to Olympian banquets
of nectar and ambrosia until, good fortune turning his head, he betrayed Zeus’s secrets and
stole the divine food to share among his mortal friends. Before this crime could be discovered, he committed a worse. Having called the Olympians to a banquet on Mount Sipylus, or it may
have been at Corinth, Tantalus found that the food in his larder was insufficient for due
company and, either to test Zeus’s omniscience, or merely to demonstrate his good will, cut
up his son Pelops, and added the pieces to the stew prepared for them, as the sons of Lycaon
had done with their brother Nyctimus when they entertained Zeus in Arcadia. None of the
gods rifled to notice what was on their trenchers, or to recoil in horror, except Demeter who,
being dazed by her loss of Persephone, ate the flesh from the left shoulder.
d. For these two crimes Tantalus was punished with the ruin of his kingdom and, after
his death by Zeus’s own hand, with eternal torment in the company of Ixion, Sisyphus, Tityus,
the Danaids, and others. Now he hangs, perennially consumed by thirst and hunger, from the
bough of a fruit-tree which leans over a marshy lake. Its waves lap against his waist, and
sometimes reach his chin, yet whenever he bends down to drink, they slip away, and nothing
remains but the black mud at his feet; or, if he ever succeeds in scooping up a handful of
water, it slips through his fingers before he can do more than wet his cracked lips, leaving him
thirstier than ever. The tree is laden with pears, shining apples, sweet figs, ripe olives and
pomegranates, which dangle against his shoulders; but whenever he reaches for the luscious
fruit, a gust of wind whirls them out of his reach.
e. Moreover, an enormous stone, a crag from Mount Sipylus, overhangs the tree and
eternally threatens to crush Tantalus’s skull. This is his punishment for a third crime: namely
theft, aggravated by perjury. One day, while Zeus was still an infant in Crete, being suckled
by the she-goat Amaltheia, Hephaestus had made Rhea a golden mastiff to watch over him;
which subsequently became the guardian of his temple at Dicte. But Pandareus son of Merops,
a native of Lydian or, it may have been Cretan, Miletus—if, indeed, it was not Ephesus—
dared to steal the mastiff, and brought it to Tantalus for safe keeping on Mount Sipylus. After
the hue and cry had died down, Pandareus asked Tantalus to return it to him, but Tantalus
swore by Zeus that he had neither seen nor heard of a golden dog. This oath coming to Zeus’s
ears, Hermes was given orders to investigate the matter; and although Tantalus continued to
perjure himself, Hermes recovered the dog by force or by stratagem, and Zeus crushed
Tantalus under a crag of Mount Sipylus. The spot is still shown near the Tantalid Lake, a
haunt of white swan-eagles. Afterwards, Pandareus and his wife Harmothoë fled to Athens,
and thence to Sicily, where they perished miserably.
f. According to others, however, it was Tantalus who stole the golden mastiff, and
Pandareus to whom he entrusted it and who, on denying that he had ever received it was
destroyed, together with his wife, by the angry gods, or turned into stone. But Pandareus’s
orphaned daughters Merope and Cleothera, whom some call Cameiro and Clytië, were reared
by Aphrodite on curds, honey, and sweet wine. Hera endowed them with beauty and more
than human wisdom; Artemis made them grow tall and strong; Athene instructed them in
every known handicraft. It is difficult to understand why these goddesses showed such
solicitude, or chose Aphrodite to soften Zeus’s heart towards these orphans and arrange good
marriages for them—unless, of course, they had themselves encouraged Pandareus to commit
the theft. Zeus must have suspected something, because while Aphrodite was closeted with
him on Olympus, the Harpies snatched away the three girls, with his consent, and handed
them over to the Erinnyes, who made them suffer vicariously for their father’s sin.
g. This Pandareus was also the father of Aëdon, the wife of Zethus, to whom she bore
Itylus. Aëdon was racked with envy of her sister Niobe, who rejoiced in the love of six sons
and six daughters and, when trying to murder Sipylus, the eldest of them, she killed Itylus by
mistake; whereupon Zeus transformed her into the Nightingale who, in early summer, nightly
laments her murdered child,
h. After punishing Tantalus, Zeus was pleased to revive Pelops; and therefore ordered
Hermes to collect his limbs and boil them again in the same cauldron, on which he laid a spell. The Fate Clotho then rearticulated them; Demeter gave him a solid ivory shoulder in place of
the one she had picked clean; and Rhea breathed life into him; while Goat-Pan danced for joy.
i. Pelops emerged from the magic cauldron clothed in such radiant beauty that
Poseidon fell in love with him on the spot, and carried him off to Olympus in a chariot drawn
by golden horses. There he appointed him his cup-bearer and bed-fellow; as Zeus later
appointed Ganymedes, and fed him on ambrosia. Pelops first noticed that his left shoulder
was of ivory when he bared his breast in mourning for his sister Niobe. All true descendants
of Pelops are marked in this way and, after his death, the ivory shoulder-blade was laid up at
Pisa.
j. Pelops’s mother Euryannassa, meanwhile, made the most diligent search for him,
not knowing about his ascension to Olympus; she learned from the scullions that he had been
boiled and served to the gods, who seemed to have eaten every last shred of his flesh. This
version of the story became current throughout Lydia; many still credit it and deny that the
Pelops whom Tantalus boiled in the cauldron was the same Pelops who succeeded him.
k. Tantalus’s ugly son Broteas carved the oldest image of the Mother of the Gods,
which still stands on the Coddinian Crag, to the north of Mount Sipylus. He was a famous
hunter, but refused to honour Artemis, who drove him mad; crying aloud that no flame could
burn him, he threw himself upon a lighted pyre and let the flames consume him. But some say
that he committed suicide because everyone hated his ugliness. Broteas’s son and heir was
named Tantalus, after his grandfather.


PELOPS AND OENOMAUS

PELOPS inherited the Paphlagonian throne from his father Tantalus, and for awhile
resided at Enete, on the shores of the Black Sea, whence he also ruled over the Lydians and
Phrygians. But he was expelled from Paphlagonia by the barbarians, and retired to Lydian
Mount Sipylus, his ancestral seat. When Ilus, King of Troy, would not leave him in peace
even there, but ordered him to move on, Pelops went with fabulous treasures across the
Aegean Sea. He resolved to find a new home for himself and his great horde of followers, but
before he left, he sued for the hand of Hippodameia, daughter of King Oenomaus, the
Arcadian, who ruled over Pisa and Elis.
b. Some say that Oenomaus had been begotten by Ares on Harpina, daughter of the
River-god Asopus; or on the Pleiad Asteria, or on Asterope; or on Eurythoë, daughter of
Danaus; while others call him the son of Alxion; or of Hyperochus.
c. By his wife Sterope, or Euarete, daughter of Acrisius, Oenomaus became the father
of Leucippus, Hippodamus, and Dysponteus of Dyspontium; and of one daughter,
Hippodameia. Oenomaus was famous for his love of horses, and forbade his subjects under
the threat of a curse ever to mate mares with asses. To this day, if Eleans need mules, they
must take their mares abroad to mate them.
d. Whether he had been warned by an oracle that his son-in-law would kill him, or
whether he had himself fallen in love with Hippodameia is disputed; but Oenomaus devised a
new way to prevent her from ever getting married. He challenged each of her suitors in turn to
a chariot race, and laid out a long course from Pisa, which lies beside the river Alpheius,
opposite Olympia, until Poseidon’s altar on the Isthmus of Corinth. Some say that the chariots
were run by four horses; others say, by two. Oenomaus insisted that Hippodameia must ride
beside each suitor, thus distracting his attention of the horses—but allowed him a start of half an hour or so earlier, before he himself sacrificed a ram on the altar of Warlike Zeus at
Olympia. The chariots would then race towards the Isthmus and if the suitor would be taken,
he must die; but should he win the race, Hippodameia would be his, and Oenomaus must die.
Since, however, the wind-like mares, Psylla and Harpirma, which Pelops’s father Ares have
given him, were immeasurably the best in Greece, being swifter even than North Wind; and
since his chariot, skilfully driven by Myrtilus, was especially designed for racing, he had
never yet failed to rival and transfixed him with his spear, another gift from Ares.
e. In this manner Oenomaus disposed of twelve or, some say thirteen princes, whose
beads and limbs he nailed above the palace, while their trunks were flung barbarously in a
heap on the ground. When he killed Marmax, the first suitor, he also butchered his mares,
Parthenia and Eripha, and buffed them beside the river Parthenia, where their tomb is still
shown. Some say that the second suitor, Alcathous, was buried near the Horse-scarer in the
hippodrome at Olympia, and that it is his spiteful ghost which baulks the charioteers.
f. Myrtilus, Oenomaus’s charioteer, was the son of Hermes by Theobule, or Cleobule;
or by the Danaid Phaethusa; but others say that he was the son of Zeus and Clymene. He too
had fallen in love with Hippodameia, but dared not enter the contest. Meanwhile, the
Olympians had decided to intervene and put an end to the daughter, because Oenomaus was
boasting that he would one day build a temple of skulls: as Evenus, Diomedes, and Antaeus
had done. When therefore Pelops, landing in Elis, begged his lover Poseidon, whom he
invoked with a sacrifice on the seashore, either to give him the swiftest chariot in the world
for his courtship of Hippodameia, or to stay the rush of Oenomaus’s brazen spear, Poseidon
was delighted to be of assistance. Pelops soon found himself the owner of a winged golden
chariot, which could race over the sea without wetting the axles, and was drawn by a team of
tireless, winged, immortal horses.
g. Having visited Mount Sipylus and dedicated to Temnian Aphrodite an image made
of green myrtle-wood, Pelops tested his chariot by driving it across the Aegean Sea. Almost
before he had time to glance about him, he had reached Lesbos, where his charioteer Cillus,
or Cellas, or Cillas, died because of the swiftness of the flight. Pelops spent the night on
Lesbos and, in a dream, saw Cillus’s ghost lamenting his fate, and pleading for heroic honours.
At dawn, he burned his body, heaped a barrow over the ashes, and founded the sanctuary of
Cillaean Apollo close by. Then he set out again, driving the chariot himself.
h. On coming to Pisa, Pelops was alarmed to see the row of heads nailed above the
palace gates, and began to regret his ambition. He therefore promised Myrtilus, if he betrayed
his master, half the kingdom and the privilege of spending the bridal night with Hippodameia
when she had been won.
i. Before entering the race—the scene is carved on the front gable of Zeus’s temple at
Olympia—Pelops sacrificed to Cydonian Athene. Some say that Cillus’s ghost appeared and
undertook to help him; others, that Sphaerus was his charioteer; but it is more generally
believed that he drove his own team, Hippodameia standing beside him
j. Meanwhile, Hippodameia had fallen in love with Pelops and, from hindering his
progress, had herself offered to reward Myrtilus generously, if her father’s course could by
some means be checked. Myrtilus therefore removed the lynch-pins from the axles of
Oenomaus’s chariot, and replaced them with others made of wax. As chariots reached the
neck of the Isthmus and Oenomaus, in hot pursue was poising his spear, about to transfix
Pelops’s back, the wheels of chariot flew off, he fell entangled in the wreckage and was
dragged to death. His ghost still haunts at the statue of Horse-scarer at Olympia. There are
some, however, who say that the swiftness of Poseidon’s win chariot and horses easily
enabled Pelops to outdistance Oenomaus and reach the Isthmus first; whereupon Oenomaus
either killed himself in despair, or was killed by Pelops at the winning-post. According to
others, the contest took place in the Hippodrome at Olympia, Amphion gave Pelops a magic object which he buried by the Horse-scarer, so that Oenomaus’s team bolted and wrecked his
chariot. But all agree that Oenomaus, before he died, laid a curse on Myrtilus, pray that he
might perish at the hands of Pelops.
k. Pelops, Hippodameia, and Myrtilus then set out for an even drive across the sea.
‘Alas!’ cried Hippodameia, ‘I have drunk noth all day; thirst parches me.’ The sun was setting
and Pelops called ashore at the desert island of Helene, which lies not far from the island
Euboea, and went up the strand in search of water. When he returned with his helmet filled,
Hippodameia ran weeping towards him, complaining that Myrtilus had tried to ravish her.
Pelops severely rebuked Myrtilus, and struck him in the face, but he protested indignantly:
‘This is the bridal night, on which you swore that I should enjoy Hippodameia. Will you
break your oath?’ Pelops made no reply, took the reins from Myrtilus and drove on. As they
approached Cape Geraestus—the southernmost promontory of Euboea, now crown with a
remarkable temple of Poseidon—Pelops dealt Myrtilus a sudden kick, which sent him flying
head-long into the sea; and Myrtilus, as sank, laid a curse on Pelops and all his house.
l. Hermes set Myrtilus’s image among the stars as the constellation of the Charioteer;
but his corpse was washed ashore on the coast Euboea and buried in Arcadian Pheneus,
behind the temple of Hermes; once a year nocturnal sacrifices are offered him there as a hero.
The Myrtoan Sea, which stretches from Euboea, past Helene, to the Aegean Sea is generally
believed to take its name from Myrtilus rather than, as Euboeans insist, from the nymph
Myrto.
m. Pelops drove on, until he reached the western stream of Oceanus, where he was
cleansed of blood guilt by Hephaestus; afterwards he came back to Pisa, and succeeded to the
throne of Oenomaus. He soon subjugated nearly the whole of what was then known as Apia,
or Pelasgiotis, and renamed it the Peloponnese, meaning ‘the island of Pelops’, after himself.
His courage, wisdom, wealth, and numerous children, earned him the envy and veneration of
all Greece
n. From King Epeius, Pelops took Olympia, and added it to his kingdom of Pisa; but
being unable to defeat King Stymphalus of Arcadia by force of arms, he invited him to a
friendly debate, cut him into pieces, and scattered his limbs far and wide; a crime which
caused a famine throughout Greece. But his celebration of the Olympian Games in honour of
Zeus, about a generation after that of Endymion, was more splendid than any before.
o. To atone for the murder of Myrtilus, who was Hermes’s son, Pelops built the first
temple of Hermes in the Peloponnese; he also tried to appease Myrtilus’s ghost by building a
cenotaph for him in the hippodrome at Olympia, and paying him heroic honours. Some say
that neither Oenomaus, nor the spiteful Alcathous, nor the magic object which Pelops buried,
is the true Horse-scarer: it is the ghost of Myrtilus.
p. Over the tomb of Hippodameia’s unsuccessful suitors, on the farthest side of the
river Alpheius, Pelops raised a tall barrow, paying them heroic honours too; and about a
furlong away stands the sanctuary of Artemis Cordax, so called because Pelops’s followers
here celebrated his victories by dancing the Rope Dance, which they had brought from Lydia.
q. Pelops’s sanctuary, where his bones are preserved in a brazen chest, was dedicated
by Tirynthian Heracles, his grandson, when he came to celebrate the Olympian Games; and
the Elean magistrates still offer Pelops the annual sacrifice of a black ram, roasted on a fire of
white poplar-wood. Those who partake of this victim are forbidden to enter Zeus’s temple
until they have bathed, and the neck is the traditional perquisite of his forester. The sanctuary
is thronged with visitors every year, when young men scourge themselves at Pelops’s altar,
offering him a libation of their blood. His chariot is shown on the roof of the Anactorium in
Hiasia; the Sicyonians keep his gold-hilted sword in their treasury at Olympia; and his spear-
shaped sceptre, at Chaeronea, is perhaps the only genuine work of Hephaestus still extant.
Zeus sent it to Pelops by the hand of Hermes, and Pelops bequeathed it to King Atreus.
r. Pelops is also styled ‘Cronian One’, or ‘Horse-beater’; and the Achaeans claim him as their
ancestor.


AGAMEMNON AND CLYTAEMNESTRA

SOME say that Agamemnon and Menelaus were of an age to arrest Thyestes at Delphi;
others, that when Aegisthus killed Atreus, they were still infants, whom their nurse had the
presence of mind to rescue. Snatching them up, one under each arm, she fled with them to
Polypheides, the twenty-fourth king of Sicyon, at whose instance they were subsequently
entrusted to Oeneus the Aetolian. It is agreed, however, that after they had spent some years
at Oeneus’s court, King Tyndareus of Sparta restored their fortunes. Marching against
Mycenae, he exacted an oath from Thyestes, who had taken refuge at the altar of Hera, that he
would bequeath the sceptre to Agamemnon, as Atreus’s heir, and go into exile, never to return.
Thyestes thereupon departed to Cythera, while Aegisthus, fearing Agamemnon’s vengeance,
fled to King Cylarabes, son of King Sthenelus the Argive.
b. It is said that Zeus gave power to the House of Aeacus, wisdom to the House of
Amythaon, but wealth to the House of Atreus. Wealthy indeed it was: the kings of Mycenae,
Corinth, Cleonae, Orneiae, Arathyrea, Sicyon, Hyperesia, Gonoessa, Pellene, Aegium,
Aegialus, and Helice, all paid tribute to Agamemnon, both on land and sea.
c. Agamemnon first made war against Tantalus, King of Pisa, the son of his ugly uncle
Broteas, killed him in battle and forcibly married his widow Clytaenmestra, whom Leda had
borne to King Tyndareus of Sparta. The Dioscuri, Clytaenmestra’s brothers, thereupon
marched on Mycenae; but Agamemnon had already gone as a suppliant to his benefactor
Tyndareus, who forgave him and let him keep Clytaemnestra. After the death of the Dioscuri,
Menelaus married their sister Helen, and Tyndareus abdicated in his favour.
d. Clytaenmestra bore Agamemnon one son, Orestes, and three daughters: Electra, or
Laodice; Iphigeneia, or Iphianassa; and Chrysothemis; though some say that Iphigeneia was
Clytaemnestra’s niece, the daughter of Theseus and Helen, whom she took pity upon and
adopted.
e. When Paris, the son of King Priam of Troy, abducted Helen and thus provoked the
Trojan War, both Agamemnon and Menelaus were absent from home for ten years; but
Aegisthus did not join their expedition, preferring to stay behind at Argos and seek revenge
on the House of Atreus.
f. Now, Nauplius, the husband of Clymene, having failed to obtain requital from
Agamemnon and the other Greek leaders for the stoning of his son Palamedes, had sailed
away from Troy and coasted around Attica and the Peloponnese, inciting the lonely wives of
his enemies to adultery. Aegisthus, therefore, when he heard that Clytaemnestra was among
those most eager to be convinced by Nauplius, planned not only to become her lover, but to
kill Agamemnon, with her assistance, as soon as the Trojan War ended.
g. Hermes, sent to Aegisthus by Omniscient Zeus, warned him to abandon this project,
on the ground that when Orestes had grown to manhood, he would be bound to avenge his
father. For all his eloquence, however, Hermes failed to deter Aegisthus, who went to
Mycenae with rich gifts in his hands, but hatred in his heart. At first, Clytaemnestra rejected
his advances, because Agamemnon, apprised of Nauplius’s visit to Mycenae, had instructed
his court bard to keep close watch on her and report to him, in writing, the least sign of
infidelity. But Aegisthus seized the old minstrel and marooned him without food on a lonely
island, where birds of prey were soon picking his bones. Clytaemnestra then yielded to
Aegisthus’s embraces, and he celebrated his unhoped for success with burnt offerings to
Aphrodite, and gifts of tapestries and gold to Artemis, who was nursing a grudge against the
House of Atreus.
h. Clytaemnestra had small cause to love Agamemnon: after killing her former
husband Tantalus, and the new-born child at her breast, he had married her by force, and then
gone away to a war which promised never to end; he had also sanctioned the sacrifice of Iphigeneia at Aulis—and, this she found even harder to bear—was said to be bringing back
Priam’s daughter Cassandra, the prophetess, as his wife in all but name. It is true that
Cassandra had borne Agamemnon twin sons: Teledamus and Pelops, but he does not seem to
have intended any insult to Clytaemnestra. Her informant had been Nauplius’s surviving son
Oeax who, in vengeance for his brother’s death, was maliciously provoking her to do murder.
i. Clytaemnestra therefore conspired with Aegisthus to kill both Agamemnon and
Cassandra. Fearing, however, that they might arrive unexpectedly, she wrote Agamemnon a
letter asking him to light a beacon on Mount Ida when Troy fell; and herself arranged for a
chain of fires to relay his signal to Argolis by way of Cape Hermaeum on Lemnos, and the
mountains of Athos, Macisms, Messapius, Cithaeron, Aegiplanctus, and Arachne. A
watchman was also stationed on the roof of the palace at Mycenae: a faithful servant of
Agamemnon’s, who spent one whole year, crouched on his elbows like a dog, gazing towards
Mount Arachne and filled with gloomy forebodings. At last, one dark night, he saw the distant
beacon blaze and ran to wake Clytaemnestra. She celebrated the news with sacrifices of
thanksgiving; though, indeed, she would now have liked the siege of Troy to last forever.
Aegisthus thereupon posted one of his own men in a watchtower near the sea, promising him
two gold talents for the first news of Agamemnon’s landing.
j. Hera had rescued Agamemnon from the fierce storm which destroyed many of the
returning Greek ships and drove Menelaus to Egypt; and, at last, a fair wind carried him to
Nauplia. No sooner had he disembarked, than he bent down to kiss the soil, weeping for joy.
Meanwhile the watchman hurried to Mycenae to collect his fee, and Aegisthus chose twenty
of the boldest warriors, posted them in ambush inside the palace, ordered a great banquet and
then, mounting his chariot, rode down to welcome Agamemnon.
k. Clytaemnestra greeted her travel-worn husband with every appearance of delight,
unrolled a purple carpet for him, and led him to the bath-house, where slave-girls had
prepared a warm bath; but Cassandra remained outside the palace, caught in a prophetic
trance, refusing to enter, and crying that she smelt blood, and that the curse of Thyestes was
heavy upon the dining-hall. When Agamemnon had washed himself and set one foot out of
the bath, eager to partake of the rich banquet now already set on the tables, Clytaemnestra
came forward, as if to wrap a towel about him, but instead threw over his head a garment of
net, woven by herself, without either neck or sleeve-holes. Entangled in this, like a fish,
Agamemnon perished at the hands of Aegisthus, who struck him twice with a two-edged
sword. He fell hard, into the silver-sided bath, where Clytaemnestra avenged her wrongs by
beheading him with an axe. She then ran out to kill Cassandra with the same weapon, not
troubling first to close her husband’s eyelids or mouth; but wiped off on his hair the blood
which had splashed her, to signify that he had brought about his own death.
l. A fierce battle was now raging in the palace, between Agamemnon’s bodyguard and
Aegisthus’s supporters. Warriors were slain like swine for a rich man’s feast, or lay wounded
and groaning beside the laden boards in a welter of blood; but Aegisthus won the day. Outside,
Cassandra’s head rolled to the ground, and Aegisthus also had the satisfaction of killing her
twin sons by Agamemnon; yet he failed to do away with another of Agamemnon’s bastards,
by name Halesus, or Haliscus. Halesus contrived to make his escape and, after long
wandering in exile, founded the Italian city of Falerios, and taught its inhabitants the
Mysteries of Hera, which are still celebrated there in the Argive manner. This massacre took
place on the thirteenth day of the month Gamelion [January] and, unafraid of divine
retribution, Clytaemnestra decreed the thirteenth day a monthly festival, celebrating it with
dancing and offerings of sheep to her guardian deities. Some applauded her resolution; but
others hold that she brought eternal disgrace upon all women, even virtuous ones. Aegisthus,
too, gave thanks to the goddess who had assisted him.
n. The Spartans claim that Agamemnon is buried at Amyclae, no more than a small
village, where are shown the tomb and statue of Clytaemnestra, also the sanctuary and statue
of Cassandra; the inhabitants even believe that he was killed there. But the truth is that
Agamemnon’s tomb stands among the ruins of Mycenae, close to those of his charioteer, of
his comrades murdered with him by Aegisthus, and of Cassandra’s twins.
o. Menelaus was later informed of the crime by Proteus, the prophet of Pharos and, having
offered hecatombs to his brother’s ghost, built a cenotaph in his honour beside the River of
Egypt. Returning to Sparta, eight years later, he raised a temple to Zeus Agamemnon; there
are other such temples at Lapersae in Attica and at Clazomene in Ionia, although Agamemnon
never reigned in either of these places.


THE BIRTH OF HERACLES

ELECTRYON, Son of Perseus, High King of Mycenae and husband of Anaxo,
marched vengefully against the Taphians and Teleboans. They had joined in a successful raid
on his cattle, planned by one Pterelaus, a claimant to the Mycenaean throne; which had
resulted in the death of Electryon’s eight sons. While he was away, his nephew King
Amphitryon of Troezen acted as regent. ‘Rule well, and when I return victorious, you shall
marry my daughter Alcmene,’ Electryon cried in farewell. Amphitryon, informed by the King
of Elis that the stolen cattle were now in his possession, paid the large ransom demanded, and
recalled Electryon to identify them. Electryon, by no means pleased to learn that Amphitryon
expected him to repay this ransom, asked harshly what right had the Eleans to sell stolen
property, and why did Amphitryon condone in a fraud? Disdaining to reply, Amphitryon
vented his annoyance by throwing a club at one of the cows which had strayed from the herd;
it struck her horns, rebounded, and killed Electryon. Thereupon Amphitryon was banished
from Argolis by his uncle Sthenelus; who seized Mycenae and Tiryns and entrusted the
remainder of the country, with Midea for its capital, to Atreus and Thyestes, the sons of
Pelops.
b. Amphitryon, accompanied by Alcmene, fled to Thebes, where King Creon purified
him and gave his sister Pealmede in marriage to Electryon’s only surviving son, Licynmius, a
bastard home by a Phrygian woman named Midea. But the pious Alcmene would not lie with
Amphitryon until he had avenged the death of her eight brothers. Creon therefore gave him
permission to raise a Boeotian army for this purpose, on condition that he freed Thebes of the Teumessian vixen; which he did by borrowing the celebrated hound Laelaps from Cephalus
the Athenian. Then, aided by Athenian, Phocian, Argive, and Locrian contingents,
Amphitryon overcame the Teleboans and Taphians, and bestowed their islands on his allies,
among them his uncle Heleius.
c. Meanwhile, Zeus, taking advantage of Amphitryon’s absence, impersonated him
and, assuring Alcmene that her brothers were now avenged—since Amphitryon had indeed
gained the required victory that very morning—lay with her all one night, to which he gave
the length of three. For Hermes, at Zeus’s command, had ordered Helius to quench the solar
fires, have the Hours unyoke his team, and spend the following day at home; because the
procreation of so great a champion as Zeus had in mind could not be accomplished in haste.
Helius obeyed, grumbling about the good old times, when day was day, and night was night;
and when Cronus, the then Almighty God, did not leave his lawful wife and go off to Thebes
on love adventures. Hermes next ordered the Moon to go slowly, and Sleep to make mankind
so drowsy that no one would notice what was happening. Alcmene, wholly deceived, listened
delightedly to Zeus’s account of the crushing defeat inflicted on Pterelaus at Oechalia, and
sported innocently with her supposed husband for the whole thirty-six hours. On the next day,
when Amphitryon returned, eloquent of victory and of his passion for her, Alcmcne did not
welcome him to the marriage couch so rapturously as he had hoped. ‘We never slept a wink
last night,’ she complained. ‘And surely you do not expect me to listen twice to the story of
your exploits?’ Amphitryon, unable to understand these remarks, consulted the seer Teiresias,
who told him that he had been cuckolded by Zeus; and thereafter he never dared sleep with
Alcmene again, for fear of incurring divine jealousy.
d. Nine months later, on Olympus, Zeus happened to boast that he had fathered a son,
now at the point of birth, who would be called Heracles, which means ‘Glory of Hera’, and
rule the noble House of Perseus. Hera thereupon made him promise that any prince born
before nightfell to the House of Perseus should be High King. When Zeus swore an
unbreakable oath to this effect, Hera went at once to Mycenae, where she hastened the pangs
of Nicippe, wife of King Sthenelus. She then hurried to Thebes, and squatted cross-legged at
Alcmene’s door, with her clothing tied into knots, and her fingers locked together; by which
means she delayed the birth of Heracles, until Eurystheus, son of Sthenelus, a seven-months
child, already lay in his cradle. When Heracles appeared, one hour too late, he was found to
have a twin named Iphicles, Amphitryon’s son and the younger by a night. But some say that
Heracles, not Iphicles, was the younger by a night; and others, that the twins were begotten on
the same night, and born together, and that Father Zeus divinely illumined the birth chamber.
At first, Heracles was called Alcaeus, or Palaemon.
e. When Hera returned to Olympus, and calmly boasted of her success in keeping
Eileithyia, goddess of childbirth, from Alcmene’s door, Zeus fell into a towering rage; seizing
his eldest daughter Ate, who had blinded him to Hera’s deceit, he took a mighty oath that she
should never visit Olympus again. Whirled around his head by her golden hair, Ate was sent
hurtling down to earth. Though Zeus could not go back on his word and allow Heracles to
rule the House of Perseus, he persuaded Hera to agree that, after performing whatever twelve
labours Eurystheus might set him, his son should become a god.
f. Now, unlike Zeus’s former human loves, from Niobe onwards, Alcmene had been
selected not so much for his pleasure—though she surpassed all other women of her day in
beauty, stateliness, and wisdom—as with a view to begetting a son powerful enough to
protect both gods and men against destruction. Alcmene, sixteenth in descent from the same
Niobe, was the last mortal woman with whom Zeus lay, for he saw no prospect of begetting a
hero to equal Heracles by any other; and he honoured Alcmene so highly that, instead of
roughly violating her, he took pains to disguise himself as Amphitryon and woo her with
affectionate words and caresses. He knew Alcmene to be incorruptible and when, at dawn, he presented her with a Carchesian goblet, she accepted it without question as spoil won in the
victory: Telebus’s legacy from his father Poseidon.
g. Some say that Hera did not herself hinder Alcmene’s travail, but sent witches to do
so, and that Historis, daughter of Teiresias, deceived them by raising a cry of joy from the
birth chamber—which is still shown at Thebes—so that they went away and allowed the child
to be born. According to others, it was Eileithyia who hindered the travail on Hera’s behalf,
and a faithful handmaiden of Alcmene’s, the yellow-haired Galanthis, or Galen, who left the
birth chamber to announce, untruly, that Alcmene had been delivered. When Eileithyia sprang
up in surprise, unclasping her fingers and uncrossing her knees, Heracles was born, and
Galanthis laughed at the successful deception—which provoked Eileithyia to seize her by the
hair and turn her into a weasel. Galanthis continued to frequent Alcmene’s house, but was
punished by Hera for having lied: she was condemned in perpetuity to bring forth her young
through the mouth. When the Thebans pay Heracles divine honours, they still offer
preliminary sacrifices to Galanthis, who is also called Galinthias and described as Proetus’s
daughter; saying that she was Heracles’s nurse and that he built her a sanctuary.
h. This Theban account is derided by the Athenians. They hold that Galanthis was a
harlot, turned weasel by Hecate in punishment for practising unnatural lust, who when Hera
unduly prolonged Alcmene’s labour, happened to run past and frighten her into delivery.
i. Heracles’s birthday is celebrated on the fourth day of every month; but some hold that he
was born as the Sun entered the Tenth Sign; others that the Great Bear, swinging westward at
midnight over Orion—which it does as the Sun quits the Twelfth Sign—looked down on him
in his tenth month.


THE YOUTH OF HERACLES

ALCMENE, fearing Hera’s jealousy, exposed her newly-born child in a field outside
the walls of Thebes; and here, at Zeus’s instigation, Athene took Hera for a casual stroll.
‘Look, my dear! What a wonderfully robust child!’ said Athene, pretending surprise as she
stopped to pick him up. ‘His mother must have been out of her mind to abandon him in a
stony field! Come, you have milk. Give the poor little creature suck!’ Thoughtlessly Hera
took him and bared her breast, at which Heracles drew with such force that she flung him
down in pain, and a spurt of milk flew across the sky and became the Milky Way. ‘The young
monster!’ Hera cried. But Heracles was now immortal, and Athene returned him to Alcmene with a smile, telling her to guard and rear him well. The Thebans still show the place where
this trick was played on Hera; it is called ‘The Plain of Heracles’.
b. Some, however, say that Hermes carried the infant Heracles to Olympus; that Zeus
himself laid him at Hera’s breast while she slept; and that the Milky Way was formed when
she awoke and pushed him away, or when he greedily sucked more milk than his mouth
would hold, and coughed it up. At all events, Hera was Heracles’s foster mother, if only for a
short while; and the Thebans therefore style him her son, and say that he had been Alcaeus
before she gave him suck, but was renamed in her honour.
c. One evening, when Heracles had reached the age of eight or ten months or, as others
say, one year, and was still unweaned, Alcmene having washed and suckled her twins, laid
them to rest under a lamb-fleece coverlet, on the broad brazen shield which Amphitryon had
won from Pterelaus. At midnight, Hera sent two prodigious azure-scaled serpents to
Amphitryon’s house, with strict orders to destroy Heracles. The gates opened as they
approached; they glided through, and over the marble floors to the nursery—their eyes
shooting flames, and poison dripping from their fangs.
d. The twins awoke, to see the serpents writhed above them, with darting, forked
tongues; for Zeus again divinely illumined the chamber. Iphicles screamed, kicked off the
coverlet and, in an attempt to escape, rolled from the shield to the floor. His frightened cries,
and the strange light shining under the nursery door, roused Alcmene. ‘Up with you,
Amphitryon!’ she cried. Without waiting to put on his sandals, Amphitryon leaped from the
cedar-wood bed, seized his sword which hung close by on the wall, and drew it from its
polished sheath. At that moment the light in the nursery went out. Shouting to his drowsy
slaves for lamps and torches, Amphitryon rushed in; and Heracles, who had not uttered so
much as a whimper, proudly displayed the serpents, which he was in the act of strangling, one
in either hand. As they died, he laughed, bounced joyfully up and down, and threw them at
Amphitryon’s feet.
e. While Alcmene comforted the terror-stricken Iphicles, Amphitryon spread the
coverlet over Heracles again, and returned to bed. At dawn, when the cock had crowed three
times, Alcmene summoned the aged Teiresias and told him of the prodigy. Teiresias, after
foretelling Heracles’s future glories, advised her to strew a broad hearth with dry faggots of
gorse, thorn and brambles, and burn the serpents upon them at midnight. In the morning, a
maid-servant must collect their ashes, take them to the rock where the Sphinx had perched,
scatter them to the winds, and run away without looking back. On her return, the palace must
be purged with fumes of sulphur and salted spring water; and its roof crowned with wild olive.
finally, a boar must be sacrificed at Zeus’s high altar. All this Alcmene did. But some hold
that the serpents were harmless, and placed in the cradle by Amphitryon himself; he had
wished to discover which of the twins was his son, and now he knew
f.. When Heracles ceased to be a child, Amphitryon taught him how to drive a chariot,
and how to turn corners without grazing the goal. Castor gave him fencing lessons, instructed
him in weapon drill, in cavalry and infantry tactics, and in the rudiments of strategy. One of
Hermes’s sons became his boxing teacher—it was either Autolycus, or else Harpalycus, who
had so grim a look when fighting that none dared face him. Eurytus taught him archery; or it
may have been the Scythian Teutarus, one of Amphitryon’s herdsmen, or even Apollo. But
Heracles surpassed all archers ever born, even his companion Alcon, father of Phalerus the
Argonaut, who could shoot through a succession of rings set on the helmets of soldiers
standing in file, and could cleave arrows held up on the points of swords or lances. Once,
when Alcon’s son was attacked by a serpent, which wound its coils about him, Alcon shot
with such skill as to wound it mortally without hurting the boy.
g. Eumolpus taught Heracles how to sing and play the lyre; while Linus, son of the
River-god Ismenius, introduced him to the study of literature. Once, when Eumolpus was absent, Linus gave the lyre lessons as well; but Heracles, refusing to change the principles in
which he had been grounded by Eumolpus, and being beaten for his stubbornness, killed
Linus with a blow of the lyre. At his trial for murder, Heracles quoted a law of Rhadamanthys,
which justified forcible resistance to an aggressor, and thus secured his own acquittal.
Nevertheless Amphitryon, fearing that the boy might commit further crimes of violence, sent
him away to a cattle ranch, where he remained until his eighteenth year, outstripping his
contemporaries in height, strength, and courage. Here he was chosen to be a laurel-bearer of
Ismenian Apollo; and the Thebans still preserve the tripod which Amphitryon dedicated for
him on this occasion. It is not known who taught Heracles astronomy and philosophy, yet he
was learned in both these subjects.
h. His height is usually given as four cubits. Since, however, he stepped out the
Olympian stadium, making it six hundred feet long, and since later Greek stadia are also
nominally six hundred feet long, but considerably shorter than the Olympic, the sage
Pythagoras decided that the length of Heracles’s stride, and consequently his stature, must
have been in the same ratio to the stride and stature of other men, as the length of the Olympic
stadium is to that of other stadia. This calculation made him four cubits and one foot high—
yet some hold that he was not above average stature.
i. Heracles’s eyes flashed fire, and he had an unerring aim, both with javelin and arrow.
He ate sparingly at noon; for supper his favourite food was roast meat and Doric barley-cakes,
of which he ate sufficient (if that is credible) to have made a hired labourer grunt ‘enough!’
His tunic was short-skirted and neat; and he preferred a night under the stars to one spent
indoors. A profound knowledge of augury led him especially to welcome the appearance of
vultures, whenever he was about to undertake a new Labour. ‘Vultures’, he would say, ‘are
the most righteous of birds: they do not attack even the smallest living creature.’
j. Heracles claimed never to have picked a quarrel, but always to have given
aggressors the same treatment as they intended for him. One Termerus used to kill travellers
by challenging them to a butting match; Heracles’s skull proved the stronger, and he crushed
Termerus’s head as though it had been an egg. Heracles was, however, naturally courteous,
and the first mortal who freely fielded the enemy their dead for burial.


MADNESS OF HERACLES

HERACLES’ defeat of the Minyans made him the most famous of heroes; and his
reward was to marry King Creon’s eldest daughter Megara, or Megera, and be appointed
protector of the city; while Iphicles married the youngest daughter. Some say that Heracles
had two sons by Megara; others that he had three, four, or even eight. They are known as the
Alcaids.
b. Heracles next vanquished Pyraechmus, King of the Euboeans, an ally of the
Minyans, when he marched against Thebes; and created terror throughout Greece by ordering
his body to be torn in two by colts and exposed unburied beside the river Heracleius, at a
place called the Colts of Pyraechmus, which gives out a neighing echo whenever horses drink
there.
c. Hera, vexed by Heracles’s excesses, drove him mad. He first attacked his beloved
nephew Iolaus, Iphicles’s eldest son, who managed to escape his wild lunges; and then,
mistaking six of his own children for enemies, shot them down, and flung their bodies into a
fire, together with two other sons of Iphicles, by whose side they were performing martial
exercises. The Thebans celebrate an annual festival in honour of these eight mail—clad
victims. On the first day, sacrifices are offered and fires burn all night; on the second, funeral
games are held and the winner is crowned with white myrtle. The celebrants grieve in
memory of the brilliant futures that had been planned for Heracles's sons. One was to have
ruled Argos, occupying Eurystheus’s palace, and Heracles had thrown his lion pelt over his
shoulders; another was to have been king of Thebes, and in his right hand Heracles had set the
mace of defence, Daedalus’s deceitful gift; a third was promised Oechalia, which Heracles
afterwards laid waste; and the choicest brides had been chosen for them all—alliances with
Athens, Thebes, and Sparta. So dearly did Heracles love these sons that many deny now his
guilt, preferring to believe that they were treacherously slain by his guests: by Lycus, perhaps,
or as Socrates has suggested, by Augeias.
d. When Heracles recovered his sanity, he shut himself up in a dark chamber for some
days, avoiding all human intercourse and then, after purification by King Thespius, went to
Delphi, to enquire what he should do. The Pythoness, addressing him for the first time as
Heracles, rather than Palaemon, advised him to reside at Tiryns; to serve Eurystheus for
twelve years; and to perform whatever Labours might be set him, in payment for which he
would be rewarded with immortality. At this, Heracles felt into deep despair, loathing to serve
a man whom he knew to be far inferior to himself, yet afraid to oppose his father Zeus. Many
friends came to solace him in his distress; and, finally, when the passage of time had
somewhat alleviated his pain, he placed himself at Eurystheus’s disposal.
e. Some, however, hold that it was not until his return from Tartarus that Heracles
went mad and killed the children; that he killed Megara too; and that the Pythoness then told
him: ‘You shall no longer be called Palaemon! Phoebus Apollo names you Heracles, since
from Hera you shall have undying fame among men!’—as though he had done Hera a great
service. Others say that Heracles was Eurystheus’s lover, and performed the Twelve Labours
for his gratification; others again, that he undertook to perform them only if Eurystheus would
annul the sentence of banishment passed on Amphitryon.
f. It has been said that when Heracles set forth on his Labours, Hermes gave him a
sword, Apollo a bow and smooth-shafted arrows, leathered with eagle feathers; Hephaestus a
golden breast-plate; and Athene a robe. Or that Athene gave him the breast-plate, but
Hephaestus bronze greaves and an adamantine helmet. Athene and Hephaestus, it is added,
rivalised with one another throughout in benefiting Heracles: she gave him enjoyment of
peaceful pleasures; he, protection from the dangers of war. The gift of Poseidon was a team of
horses; that of Zeus, a magnificent and unbreakable shield. Many were the stories worked on
this shield in enamel, ivory, electrum, gold, and lapis lazuli; moreover, twelve serpents’ heads
carved about the boss dashed their jaws whenever Heracles went into battle, and terrified his
opponents. The truth, however, is that Heracles scorned armour and, after his first Labour,
seldom carried even a spear, relying rather on his club, bow and arrows. He had little use for
the bronze-tipped club which Hephaestus gave him, preferring to cut his own from wild-olive:
first on Helicon, next at Nemea. This second club he later replaced with a third, also cut from
wild-olive, by the shores of the Saronic Sea: the club which, on his visit to Troezen, he leaned
against the image of Hermes. It struck root, sprouted, and is now a stately tree.
g. His nephew Iolaus shared in the Labours as his charioteer, or shield-bearer.


THE NEMEAN LION

THE First Labour which Eurystheus imposed on Heracles, when he came to reside at
Tiryns, was to kill and flay the Nemean, or Cleonaean lion, an enormous beast with a pelt
proof against iron, bronze, and stone.
b. Although some call this lion the offspring of Typhon, or of the Chimaera and the
Dog Orthrus, others say that Selene bore it with a fearful shudder and dropped it to earth on
Mount Tretus near Nemea, beside a two-mouthed cave; and that, in punishment for an
unfulfilled sacrifice, she set it to prey upon her own people, the chief sufferers being the
Bambinaeaus.
c. Still others say that, at Hera’s desire, Selene created the lion from sea foam enclosed
in a large ark; and that Iris, binding it with her girdle, carried it to the Nemean mountains.
These were named after a daughter of Asopus, or of Zeus and Selene; and the lion’s cave is
still shown about two miles from the city of Nemea.
d. Arriving at Cleonae, between Corinth and Argos, Heracles lodged in the house of a
day—labourer, or shepherd, named Molorchus, whose son the lion had killed. When
Molorchus was about to offer a ram in propitiation of Hera, Heracles restrained him. ‘Wait
thirty days,’ he said. ‘If I return safely, sacrifice to Saviour Zeus; if I do not, sacrifice to me as
a hero.
e. Heracles reached Nemea at midday, but since the lion had depopulated the
neighbourhood, he found no one to direct him; nor were any tracks to be seen. Having first
searched Mount Apesas—so called after Apesantus, a shepherd whom the lion had killed;
though some say that Apesantus was a son of Acrisius, who died of a snake-bite in his heel—
Heracles visited Mount Tretus, and presently descried the lion coming back to its lair,
bespattered with blood from the day’s slaughter. He shot a flight of arrows at it, but they
rebounded harmlessly from the thick pelt, and the lion licked its chops, yawning. Next, he
used his sword, which bent as though made of lead; finally he heaved up his club and dealt
the lion such a blow on the muzzle that it entered its double-mouthed cave, shaking its head—
not for pain, however, but because of the singing in its ears. Heracles, with a rueful glance at
his shattered club, then netted one entrance of the cave, and went in by the other. Aware now
that the monster was proof against all weapons, he began to wrestle with it. The lion bit off
one of his fingers; but, holding its head in chancery, Heracles squeezed hard until it choked to
death.
f. Carrying the carcass on his shoulders, Heracles returned to Cleonae, where he
arrived on the thirtieth day, and found Molorchus on the point of offering him a heroic
sacrifice; instead, they sacrificed together to Saviour Zeus. When this had been done,
Heracles cut himself a new club and, after making several alterations in the Nemean Games
hitherto celebrated in honour of Opheltes, and rededicating them to Zeus, took the lion’s
carcass to Mycenae. Eurystheus, amazed and terrified, forbade him ever again to enter the city;
in future he was to display the fruits of his Labours outside the gates.
g. For a while, Heracles was at a loss how to flay the lion, until by divine inspiration,
he thought of employing its own razor-sharp claws, and soon could wear the invulnerable pelt
as armour, arid the head as a helmet. Meanwhile, Eurystheus ordered his smiths to forge him
a brazen urn, which he buried beneath the earth. Henceforth, whenever the approach of
Heracles was signalled, he took refuge in it and sent his orders by a herald—a son of Pelops,
named Copreus, whom he had purified for murder.
h. The honours received by Heracles from the city of Nemea in recognition of this feat,
he later ceded to his devoted allies of Cleonae, who fought at his side in the Elean War, and
fell to the number of three hundred and sixty. As for Molorchus, he founded the near-by city
of Molorchia, and planted the Nemean Wood, where the Nemean Games are now held.
i. Heracles was not the only man to strangle a lion in those days. The same feat was
accomplished by his friend Phylius as the first of three love-tasks imposed on him by Cyenus,
a son of Apollo by Hyria. Phylius had also to catch alive several monstrous man-eating birds,
not unlike vultures, and after wrestling with a fierce bull, lead it to the altar of Zeus. When all
three tasks had been accomplished, Cyenus further demanded an ox which Phylius had won
as a prize at certain funeral games. Heracles advised Phylius to refuse this and press for a
settlement of his claim with Cyenus who, in desperation, leaped into a lake; thereafter called
the Cyenean lake. His mother Hyria followed him to his death, and both were transformed
into swans.


THE LERNAEAN HYDRA

THE Second Labour ordered by Eurystheus was the destruction of the Lernaean Hydra,
a monster born to Typhon and Echidne, and reared by Hera as a menace to Heracles.
b. Lerna stands beside the sea, some five miles from the city of Argos. To the west
rises Mount Pontinus, with its sacred grove of plane-trees stretching down to the sea. In this
grove, bounded on one flank by the river Pontinus—beside which Danaus dedicated a shrine
to Athene—and on the other by the river Amymone, stand images of Demeter, Dionysus the
Saviour, and Prosymne, one of Hera’s nurses; and, on the shore, a stone image of Aphrodite,
dedicated by the Danaids. Every year, secret nocturnal rites are held at Lerna in honour of
Dionysus, who descended to Tartarus at this point when he went to fetch Semele; and, not far
off, the Mysteries of Lernaean Demeter are celebrated in an enclosure which marks the place
where Hades and Persephone also descended to Tartarus.
c. This fertile and holy district was once terrorized by the Hydra, which had its lair
beneath a plane-tree at the seven-fold source of the river Amymone and haunted the
unfathomable Lernaean swamp near by—the Emperor Nero recently tried to sound it, and
failed—the grave of many an incautious traveller. The Hydra had a prodigious dog-like body,
and eight or nine snaky heads, one of them immortal; but some credit it with fifty, or one
hundred, or even ten thousand heads. At all events, it was so venomous that its very breath, or
the smell of its tracks, could destroy life.
d. Athene had pondered how Heracles might best kill this monster and, when he
reached Lerna, driven there in his chariot by Iolaus, she pointed out the Hydra’s lair to him.
On her advice, he forced the Hydra to emerge by pelting it with burning arrows, and then held
his breath while he caught hold of it. But the monster twined around his feet, in an endeavour to trip him up. In vain did he batter at its heads with his club: no sooner was one crushed, than
two or three more grew in its place.
e. An enormous crab scuttered from the swamp to aid the Hydra, and nipped
Heracles’s foot; furiously crushing its shell, he shouted to Iolaus for assistance. Iolaus set one
corner of the grove alight and then, to prevent the Hydra from sprouting new heads, seared
their roots with blazing branches; thus the flow of blood was checked.
f. Now using a sword, or a golden falchion, Heracles severed the immortal head, part
of which was of gold, and buried it, still hissing, under a heavy rock beside the road to Elaeus.
The carcass he disembowelled, and dipped his arrows in the gall. Henceforth, the least wound
from one of them was invariably fatal.
g. In reward for the crab’s services, Hera set its image among the twelve signs of the Zodiac;
and Eurystheus would not count this Labour as duly accomplished, because Iolaus had
supplied the firebrands.


THE CERYNEIAN HIND

HERACLES’ Third Labour was to capture the Ceryneian Hind, and bring her alive
from Oenoe to Mycenae. This swift, dappled creature had bronze hooves and golden horns
like a stag, so that some call her a stag. She was sacred to Artemis who, when only a child,
saw five hinds, larger than bulls, grazing on the banks of the dark-pebbled Thessalian river
Anaurus at the foot of the Parrhasian Mountains; the sun twinkled on their horns. Running in
pursuit, she caught four of them, one after the other, with her own hands, and harnessed them
to her chariot; the fifth fled across the river Celadon to the Ceryneian Hill, as Hera intended,
already having Heracles’s Labours in mind. According to another account, this hind was a
masterless monster which used to ravage the fields, and which Heracles, after a severe
struggle, sacrificed to Artemis on the summit of Mount Artemisium.
b. Loth either to kill or wound the hind, Heracles performed this Labour without
exerting the least force. He hunted her tirelessly for one whole year, his chase taking him as
far as Istria and the Land of the Hyperboreans. When, exhausted at last, she took refuge on
Mount Artemisium, and thence descended to the river Ladon, Heracles pinned her forelegs
together with an arrow, which passed between bone and sinew, drawing no blood. He then
caught her, laid her across his shoulders, and hastened through Arcadia to Mycenae. Some,
however, say that he used nets; or followed the hind’s track until he found her asleep
underneath a tree. Artemis came to meet Heracles, rebuking him for having ill-used her holy
beast, but he pleaded necessity, and put the blame on Eurystheus. Her anger was thus
appeased, and she let him carry the hind alive to Mycenae.
c. Another version of the story is that this hind was one which Taygete the Pleiad, Alcyone’s
sister, had dedicated to Artemis in gratitude for being temporarily disguised as a hind and thus
enabled to elude Zeus’s embraces. Nevertheless, Zeus could not long be deceived, and begot
Lacedaemon on her; whereupon she hanged herself on the summit of Mount Amyclaeus,
thereafter called Mount Taygetus. Taygete’s niece and namesake married Lacedaemon and
bore him Himerus, whom Aphrodite caused to deflower his sister Cleodice unwittingly, on a
night of promiscuous revel. Next day, learning what he had done, Himerus leaped into the
river, now sometimes known by his name, and was seen no more; but oftener it is called the
Eurotas, because Lacedaemon’s predecessor, King Eurotas, having suffered an ignominious
defeat at the hands of the Athenians—he would not wait for the full moon before giving
battle—drowned himself in its waters. Eurotas, son of Myles, the inventor of water mills, was
Amyclas’s father, and grandfather both of Hyacinthus and of Eurydice, who married Acrisius.


THE ERYMANTHIAN BOAR

THE Fourth Labour imposed on Heracles was to capture alive the Erymanthian Boar:
a fierce, enormous beast which haunted the cypress-covered slopes of Mount Erymanthus,
and the thickets of Arcadian Mount Lampeia; and ravaged the country around Psophis. Mount
Erymanthus takes its name from a son of Apollo, whom Aphrodite blinded because he had
seen her bathing; Apollo in revenge turned himself into a boar and killed her lover Adonis.
Yet the mountain is sacred to Artemis.
b. Heracles, passing through Pholoë on his way to Erymanthus where he killed one
Saurus, a cruel bandit—was entertained by the Centaur Pholus, whom one of the ash-nymphs
bore to Silenus. Pholus set roast meat before Heracles, but himself preferred the raw, and
dared not open the Centaurs’ communal wine jar until Heracles reminded him that it was the
very jar which, four generations earlier, Dionysus had left in the cave against this very
occasion. The Centaurs grew angry when they smelt the strong wine. Armed with great rocks,
up-rooted fir-trees, firebrands, and butchers’ axes, they made a rush at Pholus’s cave. While
Pholus bid in terror, Heracles boldly repelled Ancius and Agrius, his first two assailants, with
a volley of firebrands. Nephele, the Centaurs’ cloudy grandmother, then poured down a smart
shower of rain, which loosened Heracles’s bow-string and made the ground slippery.
However, he showed himself worthy of his former achievements, and killed several Centaurs,
among them Oreus and Hylaeus. The rest fled as far as Malea, where they took refuge with
Cheiron, their king, who had been driven from Mount Pelion by the Lapiths.
c. A parting arrow from Heracles’s bow passed through Elatus’s arm, and stuck
quivering in Cheiron’s knee. Distressed at the accident to his old friend, Heracles drew out the
arrow and though Cheiron himself supplied the ruineraries for dressing the wound, they were
of no avail and he retired howling in agony to his cave; yet could not die, because he was
immortal. Prometheus later offered to accept immortality in his stead, and Zeus approved this
arrangement; but some say that Cheiron chose death not so much because of the pain he
suffered as because he had grown weary of his long life.
d. The Centaurs now fled in various directions: some with Eurythis to Pholoë; some
with Nessus to the river Evenus; some to Mount Malea; others to Sicily, where the Sirens
destroyed them. Poseidon received the remainder at Eleusis, and hid them in a mountain.
Among those whom Heracles later killed was Homadus the Arcadian, who tried to rape
Eurystheus’s sister Alcyone; by thus nobly avenging insult offered to an enemy, Heracles won
great fame.
e. Pholus, in the meantime, while burying his dead kinsmen, drew out one of
Heracles’s arrows and examined it. ‘How can so robust creature have succumbed to a mere
scratch?’ he wondered. But the arrow slipped from his fingers and, piercing his foot, killed
him the and then. Heracles broke off the pursuit and returned to Pholoë, where he buried
Pholus with unusual honours at the foot of the mountain which has taken his name. It was on
this occasion that the river Anigrus acquired the foul smell which now clings to it from its
very source on Mount Lapithus: because a Centaur named Pylenor, whom Heracles had
winged with an arrow, fled and washed his wound there. Some, however, hold that Melampus
had caused the stench some year before, by throwing into the Anigrus the foul objects used
for purifying the daughters of Proetus.
f. Heracles now set off to chase the boar by the river Erymanthus. To take so savage a
beast alive was a task of unusual difficulty; but he dislodged it from a thicket with loud
halloos, drove it into a deep snow-drift, and sprang upon its back. He bound it with chains,
and carried alive on his shoulders to Mycenae; but when he heard that the Argonauts were
gathering for their voyage to Colchis, dropped the boar outside the market place and, instead
of waiting for further orders from Eurystheus, who was hiding in his bronze jar, went off with
Hylas to join the expedition. It is not known who despatched the captured boar, but its tusks
are preserved in the temple of Apollo at Cumae.
g. According to some accounts, Cheiron was accidentally wounded by an arrow that pierced
his left foot, while he and Pholus and the young Achilles were entertaining Heracles on
Mount Pelion. After nine days, Zeus set Cheiron’s image among the stars as the Centaur. But
others hold that the Centaur is Pholus, who was honoured by Zeus in this way because he
excelled all men in the art of prophesying from entrails; The Bowman in the Zodiac is
likewise a Centaur: one Crotus who lived on Mount Helicon, greatly beloved by his foster-
sisters, the Muses.

THE STABLES OF AUGEIAS

HERACLES’S Fifth Labour was to cleanse King Augeias’s filthy cattle yard in one
day. Eurystheus gleefully pictured Heracles’s disgust having to load the dung into baskets and
carry these away on his shoulders. Augeias, King of Elis, was the son of Helius, or Eleius, by
Naupiadame, a daughter of Amphidamas; or, some say, by Iphinoë. Others call him the son of
Poseidon. In flocks and herds he was the wealthiest man on earth: for, by a divine
dispensation, his were immune against disease and inimitably fertile, nor did they ever
miscarry. Although in almost every case they produced female offspring, he nevertheless had
three hundred white-legged black bulls and two hundred red stud—bulls; besides twelve
outstanding silvery-white bulls: sacred to his father Helius. These twelve hundreds defended
his herds against marauding wild beasts from the wooded hills.
b. Now, the dung in Augeias’s cattle yard and sheep-folds had not been cleared away
for many years, and though its poisonous stench not affect the beasts themselves, it spread a
pestilence across the whole Peloponnese. Moreover, the valley pastures were so deep in dung
that they could no longer be ploughed for grain.
c. Heracles hailed Augeias from afar, and undertook to cleanse the yard before
nightfall in return for a tenth part of the cattle. Augeias laughed incredulously, and called
Phyleus, his eldest son, to witness Heracles’ offer. ‘Swear to accomplish the task before
nightfall,’ Phyleus demanded. The oath which Heracles now took by his father’s name the
first and last one he ever swore. Augeias likewise took an oath to keep his side of the bargain.
At this moment, Phaëthon, the leader of the twelve white bulls, charged at Heracles,
mistaking him for a lion; whereupon he seized the bull’s left horn, forced its neck downwards,
and floored it by main strength.
d. On the advice of Menedemus the Elean, and aided by Iolaus, Heracles first breached
the wall of the yard in two places, and next diverted the neighbouring rivers Alpheus and
Peneius, or Menius, so that their streams rushed through the yard, swept it clean and then
went on to cleanse the sheep-folds and the valley pastures. Thus Heracles accomplished this
Labour in one day, restoring the land to health, and not soiling so much as his little finger. But
Augeias, on being informed by Copreus that Heracles had already been under orders from
Eurystheus to cleanse the cattle yards, refused to pay the reward and even dared deny that he
and Heracles had struck a bargain.
e. Heracles suggested that the case be submitted to arbitration; yet when the judges
were seated, and Phyleus, subpoenaed by Heracles, testified to the truth, Augeias sprang up in
a rage and banished them both from Elis, asserting that he had been tricked by Heracles, since
the river-gods, not he, had done the work. To make matters even worse, Eurystheus refused to
count this Labour as one of the ten, because Heracles had been in Augeias’s hire.
f. Phyleus then went to Dulichium; and Heracles to the court of Dexamenus, King of Olenus,
whose daughter Mnesimache he later rescued from the Centaur Eurytion.


THE STYMPHALIAN BIRDS

HERACLES’S Sixth Labour was to remove the countless brazen-beaked, brazen-
clawed, brazen-winged, man-eating birds, sacred to Ares which, frightened by the wolves of
Wolves’ Ravine on the Orchomenan Road, had flocked to the Stymphalian Marsh. Here they
bred and waded beside the river of the same name, occasionally taking to the air in great
flocks, to kill men and beasts by discharging a shower of brazen feathers and at the same time
muting a poisonous excrement, which blighted the crops.
b. On arrival at the marsh, which lay surrounded by dense woods, Heracles found
himself unable to drive away the birds with his arrows; they were too numerous. Moreover,
the marsh seemed neither solid enough to support a man walking, nor liquid enough for the
use of a boat. As Heracles paused irresolutely on the bank, Athene gave him a pair of brazen
castanets, made by Hephaestus; or it may have been a rattle. Standing on a spur of Mount
Cyllene, which overlooks the marsh, Heracles clacked the castanets, or shook the rattle,
raising such a din that the birds soared up in one great flock, mad with terror. He shot down
scores of them as they flew off to the Isle of Ares in the Black Sea, where they were
afterwards found by the Argonauts; some say that Heracles was with the Argonauts at the
time, and killed many more of the birds.
c. Stymphalian birds are the size of cranes, and closely resemble ibises, except that
their beaks can pierce a metal breast-plate, and are not hooked. They also breed in the Arabian
Desert, and there cause more trouble even than lions or leopards by flying at travellers’
breasts and transfixing them. Arabian hunters have learned to wear protective cuirasses of
plaited bark, which entangle those deadly beaks and enable them to seize and wring the necks
of their assailants. It may be that a flock of these birds migrated from Arabia to Stymphalus,
and gave their name to the whole breed.
d. According to some accounts, the so-called Stymphalian Birds were women:
daughters of Stymphalus and Ornis, whom Heracles killed because they refused him
hospitality. At Stymphalus, in the ancient temple of Stymphalian Artemis, images of these
birds are hung from the roof, and behind the building stand statues of maidens with birds’ legs.
Here also Temenus, a son of Pelasgus, founded three shrines in Hera’s honour: in the first she
was worshipped as Child, because Temenus had reared her; in the second as Bride, because
she had married Zeus; in the third as Widow, because she had repudiated Zeus and retired to
Stymphalus.


THE CRETAN BULL

EURYSTHEUS ordered Heracles, as his Seventh Labour, to capture the Cretan Bull;
but it is much disputed whether this was the bull sent by Zeus, which ferried Europe across to
Crete, or the one, withheld by Minos from sacrifice to Poseidon, which sired the Minotaur on
Pasiphaë. At this time it was ravaging Crete, especially the region watered by the river Tethris,
rooting up crops and levelling orchard walls.
b. When Heracles sailed to Crete, Minos offered him every assistance in his power,
but he preferred to capture the bull single-handed, though it belched scorching flames. After a
long struggle, he brought the monster across to Mycenae, where Eurystheus, dedicating it to
Hera, set it free. Hera however, loathing a gift which redounded to Heracles’s glory, drove the
bull first to Sparta, and then back through Arcadia and across the Isthmus to Attic Marathon,
whence Theseus later dragged it to Athens as a sacrifice to Athene.
c. Nevertheless, many still deny the identity of the Cretan and Marathonian bulls.


THE MARES OF DIOMEDES

EURYSTHEUS ordered Heracles, as his Eighth Labour, to capture the four savage
mares of Thracian King Diomedes—it is disputed whether he was the son of Ares and Cyrene,
or born of an incestuous relationship between Asteria and her father Atlas—who ruled the
warlike Bistones, and whose stables, at the now vanished city of Tirida, were the terror of
Thrace. Diomedes kept the mares tethered with iron chains to bronze mangers, and fed them
on the flesh of his unsuspecting guests. One version of the story makes them stallions, not
mares, and names them Podargus, Lampon, Xanthus, and Deinus.
b. With a number of volunteers, Heracles set sail for Thrace, visiting his friend King
Admetus of Pherae on the way. Arrived at Tirida, he overpowered Diomedes’s grooms and
drove the mares down to the sea, where he left them on a knoll in charge of his mignon
Abderus, and then turned to repel the Bistones as they rushed in pursuit. His party being
outnumbered, he overcame them by ingeniously cutting a channel which caused the sea to
flood the low-lying plain; when they turned to run, he pursued them, stunned Diomedes with
his club, dragged his body around the lake that had now formed, and set it before his own
mares, which tore at the still living flesh. Their hunger being now fully assuaged—for, while
Heracles was away, they had also devoured Abderus—he mastered them without much
trouble.
c. According to another account Abderus, though a native of Opus in Locris, was employed
by Diomedes. Some call him the son of Hermes; and others the son of Heracles’s friend,
Opian Menoetius, and thus brother to Patroclus who fell at Troy. After founding the city of
Abdera beside Abderus’s tomb, Heracles took Diomedes’s chariot and harnessed the mares to
it, though hitherto they had never known bit or bridle. He drove them speedily back across the
mountains until he reached Mycenae, where Eurystheus dedicated them to Hera and set them
free on Mount Olympus. They were eventually destroyed by wild beasts; yet it is claimed that
their descendants survived until the Trojan War and even until the time of Alexander the
Great. The ruins of Diomedes’s palace are shown at Cartera Come, and at Abdera athletic
games are still celebrated in honour of Abderus—they include all the usual contests, except
chariot-racing; which accounts for the story that Abderus was killed when the man-eating
mares wrecked a chariot to which he had harnessed them.


HIPPOLYTE'S GIRDLE

HERACLES’S Ninth Labour was to fetch for Eurystheus’s daughter Admete the
golden girdle of Ares worn by the Amazonian queen Hippolyte. Taking one ship or, some say,
nine, and a company of volunteers, among whom were Iolaus, Telamon of Aegina, Peleus of
Iolcus and, according to some accounts, Theseus of Athens, Heracles set sail for the river
Thermodon.
b. The Amazons were children of Ares by the Naiad Harmonia, born in the glens of
Phrygian Acmonia; but some call their mother Aphrodite, or Otrere, daughter of Ares. At first
they lived beside the river Amazon, now named after Tanais, a son of the Amazon Lysippe,
who offended Aphrodite by his scorn of marriage and his devotion to war. In revenge,
Aphrodite caused Tanais to fall in love with his mother; but, rather than yield to an incestuous
passion, he flung himself into the river and drowned. To escape the reproaches of his ghost,
Lysippe then led her daughters around the Black Sea coast, to a plain by the river Thermodon,
which rises in the lofty Amazonian mountains. There they formed three tribes, each of which
founded a city.
c. Then as now, the Amazons reckoned descent only through the mother, and Lysippe
had laid it down that the men must perform all household tasks, while the women fought and
governed. The arms and legs of infant boys were therefore broken to incapacitate them for
war or travel. These unnatural women, whom the Scythians call Oeorpata, showed no regard
for justice or decency, but were famous warriors, being the first to employ cavalry. They
carried brazen bows and short shields shaped like a half moon; their helmets, clothes, and
girdles were made from the skins of wild beasts. Lysippe, before she fell in battle, built the
great city of Themiscyra, and defeated every tribe as far as the river Tanais. With the spoils of
her campaigns she raised temples to Ares, and others to Artemis Tauropolus whose worship
she established. Her descendants extended the Amazonian empire westward across the river
Tanais, to Thrace; and again, on the southern coast, westward across the Thermodon to
Phrygia. Three famous Amazonian queens, Marpesia, Lampado, and Hippo, seized a great
part of Asia Minor and Syria, and founded the cities of Ephesus, Smyrna, Cyrene, and Myrine.
Other Amazonian foundations are Thiba and Sinope.
d. At Ephesus, they set up an image of Artemis under a beech-tree, where Hippo
offered sacrifices; after which her followers performed first a shield dance, and then a round
dance, with rattling quivers, beating the ground in unison, to the accompaniment of pipes—
for Athene had not yet invented the flute. The temple of Ephesian Artemis, later built around
this image and unrivalled in magnificence even by that of Delphic Apollo, is included among
the seven wonders of the world; two streams, both called Selenus, and flowing in opposite
directions, surround it. It was on this expedition that the Amazons captured Troy, Priam being
then still a child. But while detachments of the Amazonian army went home laden with vast
quantities of spoil, the rest, staying to consolidate their power in Asia Minor, were driven out
by an alliance of barbarian tribes, and lost their queen Marpesia.
e. By the time that Heracles came to visit the Amazons, they had all returned to the
river Thermodon, and their three cities were ruled by Hippolyte, Antiope, and Melanippe. On
his way, he put in at the island of Paros, famous for its marble, which King Rhadamanthys
had bequeathed to one Alcaeus, a son of Androgeus; but four of Minos’s sons, Eurymedon,
Chryses, Nephalion, and Philolaus, had also settled there. When a couple of Heracles’s crew,
landing to fetch water, were murdered by Minos’s sons, he indignantly killed all four of them,
and pressed the Parians so hard that they sent envoys offering, in requital for the dead sailors,
any two men whom he might choose to be his slaves. Satisfied by this proposal, Heracles
raised the siege, King Alcaeus and his brother Sthenelus, whom he took aboard his ship. Next,
he sailed through the Hellespont and Bosphorus to Mariandyne in Mysia, where he was
entertained by King Lycus the Paphlagonian, son of Dascylus and grandson of Tantalus. In
return, he supported Lycus in a war with the Bebrycans, killing many, including their king Mygdon, brother of Amycus, and recovered much Paphlagonian land from the Bebrycans;
this he restored to Lycus, who renamed it Heracleia in his honour. Later, Heracleia was
colonized by Megarians ant Tanagrans on the advice of the Pythoness at Delphi, who told
them to plant a colony beside the Black Sea, in a region dedicated to Heracles.
f. Arrived at the mouth of the river Thermodon, Heracles cast anchor in the harbour of
Themiscyra, where Hippolyte paid him a visit and, attracted by his muscular body, offered
him Ares’s girdle as a love gift. But Hera had meanwhile gone about, disguised in Amazon
dress, spreading a rumour that these strangers planned to abduct Hippolyte; whereupon the
incensed warrior-women mounted their horses and charged down on the ship. Heracles,
suspecting treachery, killed Hippolyte off-hand, removed her girdle, seized her axe and other
weapons, and prepared to defend himself. He killed each of the Amazon leaders in turn,
putting their army to flight after great slaughter.
g. Some, however, say that Melanippe was ambushed, and ransomed by Hippolyte at
the price of the girdle; or contrariwise. Or that Theseus captured Hippolyte, and presented her
girdle to Heracles who, in return, allowed him to make Antiope his slave. Or that Hippolyte
refused to give Heracles the girdle and that they fought a pitched battle; she was thrown off
her horse, and he stood over her, club in hand, offering quarter, but she chose to die rather
than yield. It is even said that the girdle belonged to a daughter of Briareus the Hundred-
handed One.
h. On his return from Themiscyra, Heracles came again to Mariandyne, and competed
in the funeral games of king Lycus’s brother Priolas, who had been killed by the Mysians, and
for whom dirges are still sung. Heracles boxed against the Mariandynian champion Titias,
knocked out all his teeth and killed him with a blow to the temple. In proof of his regret for
this accident, he subdued the Mysians and the Phrygians on Dascylus’s behalf; but he also
subdued the Bithynians, as far as the mouth of the river Rhebas and the summit of Mount
Colone, and claimed their kingdom for himself. Pelops’s Paphlagonians voluntarily
surrendered to him. However, no sooner had Heracles departed, than the Bebrycans, under
Amycus, son of Poseidon, once more robbed Lycus of his land, extending their frontier to the
river Hypius.
i. Sailing thence to Troy, Heracles rescued Hesione from a sea-monster; and continued
his voyage to Thracian Aenus, where he was entertained by Poltys; and, just as he was putting
to sea again, shot and killed on the Aenian beach Poltys’s insolent brother Sarpedon, a son of
Poseidon. Next, he subjugated the Thracians who had settled in Thasos, and bestowed the
island on the sons of Androgeus, whom he had carried off from Paros; and at Torone was
challenged to a wrestling match by Polygonus and Telegonus, sons of Proteus, both of whom
he killed.
j. Returning to Mycenae at last, Heracles handed the girdle to Eurystheus, who gave it
to Admete. As for the other spoil taken from the Amazons: he presented their rich robes to the
Temple of Apollo at Delphi, and Hippolyte’s axe to Queen Omphale, who included it among
the sacred regalia of the Lydian kings. Eventually it was taken to a Carian temple of
Labradian Zeus, and placed in the hand of his divine image.
k. Amazons are still to be found in Albania, near Colchis, having been driven there
from Themiscyra at the same time as their neighbours, the Gargarensians. When they reached
the safety of the Albanian mountains, the two peoples separated: the Amazons settling at the
foot of the Caucasian Mountains, around the river Mermodas, and the Gargarensians
immediately to the north. On an appointed day every spring, parties of young Amazons and
young Gargarensians meet at the summit of the mountain which separates their territories and,
after performing a joint sacrifice, spend two months together, enjoying promiscuous
intercourse under the cover of night. As soon as an Amazon finds herself pregnant, she
returns home. Whatever girl-children are born become Amazons, and the boys are sent to the Gargarensians who, because they have no means of ascertaining their paternity, distribute
them by lot among their huts. In recent times, the Amazon queen Minythyia set out from her
Albanian court to meet Alexander the Great in tiger-haunted Hyrcania; and there enjoyed his
company for thirteen days, hoping to have offspring by him—but died childless soon
afterwards.
l. These Amazons of the Black Sea must be distinguished from Dionysus’s Libyan
allies who once inhabited Hespera, an island in Lake Tritonis which was so rich in fruit-
bearing trees, sheep and goats, that they found no need to grow corn. After capturing all the
cities in the island, except holy Mene, the home of the Ethiopian fish-eaters (who mine
emeralds, rubies, topazes, and sard) they defeated the neighbouring Libyans and nomads, and
founded the great city of Chersonesus, so called because it was built on a peninsula. From this
base they attacked the Atlantians, the most civilized nation west of the Nile, whose capital is
on the Atlantic island of Cerne. Myrine, the Amazonian queen, raised a force of thirty
thousand cavalry and three thousand infantry. All of them carried bows with which, when
retreating, they used to shoot accurately at their pursuers, and were armoured with the skins of
the almost unbelievably large Libyan serpents.
m. Invading the land of the Atlantians, Myrine defeated them decisively and, crossing
over to Cerne, captured the city; she then put every man to the sword, enslaved the women
and children, and razed the city walls. When the remaining Atlantians agreed to surrender, she
treated them fairly, made friends with them and, in compensation for their loss of Cerne, built
the new city of Myrine, where she settled the captives and all others desirous of living there.
Since the Atlantians now offered to pay her divine honours, Myrine protected them against
the neighbouring tribe of Gorgons, of whom she killed a great many in a pitched battle,
besides taking no less than three thousand prisoners. That night, however, while the Amazons
were holding a victory banquet, the prisoners stole their swords and, at a signal, the main
body of Gorgons who had rallied and hidden in an oak-wood, poured down from all sides to
massacre Myrine’s followers.
n. Myrine contrived to escape—her dead lie buffed under three huge mounds, still
called the Mounds of the Amazons—and, after traversing most of Libya, entered Egypt with a
new army, befriended King Horus, the son of Isis, and passed on to the invasion of Arabia.
Some hold that it was these Libyan Amazons, not those from the Black Sea, who conquered
Asia Minor; and that Myrine, after selecting the most suitable sites in her new empire,
founded a number of coastal cities, including Myrine, Gyme, Pitane, Palerie, and others
farther inland. She also subdued several of the Aegean Islands, notably Lesbos, where she
built the city of Mitylene, named after a sister who had shared in the campaign. While Myrine
was still engaged in conquering the islands, a storm overtook her fleet; but the Mother of the
Gods bore every ship safely to Samothrace, then uninhabited, which Myrine consecrated to
her, founding altars and offering splendid sacrifices.
o. Myrine then crossed over to the Thracian mainland, where King Mopsus and his
ally, the Scythian Sipylus, worsted her in fair fight, and she was killed. The Amazon army
never recovered from this setback: defeated by the Thracians in frequent engagements, its
remnants finally retired to Libya.


THE CATTLE OF GERYON

HERACLES’s Tenth Labour was to fetch the famous cattle of Geryon from Erytheia,
an island near the Ocean stream, without either demand or payment. Geryon, a son of
Chrysaor and Callirrhoë, a daughter the Titan Oceanus, was the King of Tartessus in Spain,
and reputed the strongest man alive. He had been born with three heads, six hands and three
bodies joined together at the waist. Geryon’s shambling cattle, beasts of marvellous beauty,
were guarded by the herdsman Eurytion, son of Ares, and by the two-headed watchdog
Orthrus, formerly Atlas’s property—born of Typhon and Echidne.
b. During his passage through Europe, Heracles destroyed many wild beasts and, when
at last he reached Tartessus, erected a pair of pillars facing each other across the straits, one in
Europe, one in Africa. Some hold that the two continents were formerly joined together, and
that he cut a channel between them, or thrust the cliffs apart; others say that, on the contrary,
he narrowed the existing straits to discourage the entry of whales and other sea-monsters.
c. Helius beamed down upon Heracles who, finding it impossible to work in such heat,
strung his bow and let fly an arrow at the god. ‘Enough of that!’ cried Helius angrily.
Heracles apologized for his ill-temper, and unstrung his bow at once. Not to be outdone in
courtesy, Helius lent Heracles his golden goblet, shaped like a water-lily, in which he sailed to
Erytheia; but the Titan Oceanus, to try him, made the goblet pitch violently upon the waves.
Heracles again drew his bow, which frightened Oceanus into calming the sea. Another
account is that Heracles sailed to Erytheia in a brazen urn, using his lion pelt as a sail.
d. On his arrival, he ascended Mount Abas. The dog Orthrus rushed at him, barking,
but Heracles’s club struck him lifeless; and Eurytion, Geryon’s herdsman, hurrying to
Orthrus’s aid, lied in the same manner. Heracles then proceeded to drive away the cattle.
Menoetes, who was pasturing the cattle of Hades near by—but Heracles had left these
untouched—took the news to Geryon. Challenged to battle, Heracles ran to Geryon’s flank
and shot him sideways through all three bodies with a single arrow; but some say that he
stood his ground and let loose a flight of three arrows. As Hera hastened to Geryon’s
assistance, Heracles wounded her with an arrow in the right breast, and she fled. Thus he won
the cattle, without either demand or payment, and embarked in the golden goblet, which he
then sailed across to Tartessus and gratefully returned to Helius. From Geryon’s blood sprang
a tree which, at the time of the Pleiades’ rising, bears stoneless cherry-like fruit. Geryon did
not, however, die without issue: his daughter Erytheia became by Hermes the mother of
Norax, who led a colony to Sardinia, even before the time of Hyllus, and there founded Nora,
the oldest city in the island.
e. The whereabouts of Erytheia, also called Erythrea, or Erythria, is disputed. Though
some describe it as an island beyond the Ocean stream, others place it off the coast of
Lusitania. Still others identify it with the island of Leon, or with an islet near-by, on which the
earliest city of Gades was built, and where the pasture is so rich that the milk yields no whey
but only curds, and the cattle must be cupped every fifty days, lest they choke for excess of
blood. This islet, sacred to Hera, is called either Erytheia, or Aphrodisias. Leon, the island on
which present city of Gades stands, used to be called Cotinusa, from its olives, but the
Phoenicians renamed it Gadira, or ‘Fenced City’. On western cape stands a temple of Cronus,
and the city of Gades; on eastern, a temple of Heracles, remarkable for a spring which ebbs at
flood tide, and flows at ebb tide; and Geryon lies buried in the city, equally famed for a secret
tree that takes diverse forms.
f. According to another account, however, Geryon’s cattle were not pastured in any
island, but on the mountain slopes of the farther part of Spain, confronting the Ocean; and
‘Geryon’ was a title of the renowned King Chrysaor, who ruled over the whole land, and
whose three strong and courageous sons helped him in the defence of his kingdom, each
leading an army recruited from warlike races. To confront these, Heracles assembled a large
expedition in Crete, the birthplace of his father Zeus. Before setting out, he was splendidly
honoured by Cretans and, in return, rid their island of bears, wolves, serpents, other noxious
creatures, from which it is still immune. First, he sailed to Libya, where he killed Antaeus,
slaughtered the wild beasts that infested the desert, and gave the country unsurpassed fertility.
Then he visited Egypt, where he killed Busiris; then he marched westward across North
Africa, annihilating the Gorgons and the Libyan Amazones, as he went, founded the city of
Hecatompylus, now Capsa, in southern Numidia, and reached the Ocean near Gades. There he
set up pillar on either side of the straits and, ferrying his army across to Spain, fought that the
sons of Chrysaor, with their three armies, were encamped in some distance from one another.
He conquered and killed them, in turn, and finally drove off Geryon’s famous herds, leaving
government of Spain to the most worthy of the surviving inhabitants.
g. The Pillars of Heracles are usually identified with Mount Calpe in Europe, and
Abyle, or Abilyx in Africa. Others make them the islets near Gades, of which the larger is
sacred to Hera. All Spaniards and Libyans, however, take the word ‘Pillars’ literally, and
place them in Gades, where brazen columns are consecrated to Heracles, eight cubits high and
inscribed with the cost of their building; here sailors carry sacrifices whenever they return
safely from a voyage. According to people of Gades themselves, the King of Tyre was
ordered by oracle to found a colony near the Pillars of Heracles, and sent out three successive
parties of exploration. The first party, thinking that the oracle had referred to Abyle and Calpe,
landed inside the straits, where the city of Exitani now stands; the second sailed about two hundred miles beyond the straits, to an island sacred to Heracles, opposite the Spanish city of
Onoba; but both were discouraged by unfavourable omens when they offered sacrifices, and
returned home. The third party reached Gades, where they raised a temple to Heracles on the
eastern cape and successfully founded the city of Gades on the western.
h. Some, however, deny that it was Heracles who set up these pillars, and assert that
Abyle and Calpe were first named ‘The Pillars of Cronus’, and afterwards ‘The Pillars of
Briareus’, a giant whose power extended thus far; but that, the memory of Briareus (also
called Aegaeon) having faded, they were renamed in honour of Heracles, perhaps because the
city of Tartessus, which stands only five miles from Calpe, was founded by him, and used to
be known as Heracleia. Vast ancient walls and ship-sheds are still shown there. But it must be
remembered that the earliest Heraclides had also been called Briareus. The number of
Heracles’s Pillars is usually given as two; but some speak of three, or four. So—called Pillars
of Heracles are also reported from the northern coast of Germany; from the Black Sea; from
the western extremity of Gaul; and from India.
i. A temple of Heracles stands on the Sacred Promontory in Lusitania, the most
westerly point of the world. Visitants are forbidden to enter the precinct by night, the time
when the gods take up their abode in it. Perhaps when Heracles set up his pillars to mark the
utmost limits of legitimate seafaring, this was the site he chose.
j. How he then drove the cattle to Mycenae is much disputed. Some say that he forced
Abyle and Calpe into temporary union and went across the resultant bridge into Libya; but,
according to a more probable account he passed through the territory of what is now Abdera,
a Phoenician settlement, and then through Spain, leaving behind some of his followers as
colonists. In the Pyrenees, he courted and buried the Bebrycan princess Pyrene, from whom
this mountain range takes its name; the river Danube is said to have its source there, near a
city also named in her honour. He then visited Gaul, where he abolished a barbarous native
custom of killing strangers, and won so many hearts by his generous deeds that he was able to
found a large city, to which he gave the name Alesia, or ‘Wandering’, in commemoration of
his travels. The Gauls to this day honour Alesia as the hearth and mother-city of their whole
land—it was unconquered until Caligula’s reign and claim descent from Heracles’s union
with a tall princess named Galata, who chose him as her lover and bred that warlike people.
k. When Heracles was driving Geryon’s cattle through Liguria, two sons of Poseidon
named Ialebion and Dercynus tried to steal them from him, and were both killed. At one stage
of his battle with hostile Ligurian forces, Heracles ran out of arrows, and knelt down, in tears,
wounded and exhausted. The ground being of soft mould, he could find no stones to throw at
the enemy—Ligys, the brother of Ialebion, was their leader—until Zeus, pitying his tears,
overshadowed the earth with a cloud, from which a shower of stones hailed down; and with
these he put the Ligurians to flight. Zeus set among the stars an image of Heracles fighting the
Ligurians, known as the constellation Engonasis. Another memorial of this battle survives on
earth: namely the broad, circular plain lying between Marseilles and the mouths of the river
Rhodane, about fifteen miles from the sea, called ‘The Stony Plain’, because it is strewn with
stones the size of a man’s fist; brine springs are also found there.
l. In his passage over the Ligurian Alps, Heracles carved a road fit for his armies and
baggage trains; he also broke up all robber bands that infested the pass, before entering what
is now Cis-alpine Gaul and Etruria. Only after wandering down the whole coast of Italy, and
crossing into Sicily, did it occur to him: ‘I have taken the wrong road!’ The Romans say that,
on reaching the Albula—afterwards called the Tiber—he was welcomed by King Evander, an
exile from Arcadia. At evening, he swam across, driving the cattle before him, and lay down
to rest on a grassy bed. In a deep cave near by, lived a vast, hideous, three-headed shepherd
named Cacus, a son of Hephaestus and Medusa, who was the dread and disgrace of the
Aventine Forest, and puffed flames from each of his three mouths. Human skulls and arms hung nailed above the lintels of his cave, and the ground inside gleamed white with the bones
of his victims. While Heracles slept, Cacus stole the two finest of his bulls; as well as four
heifers, which he dragged backwards by their tails into his lair.
m. At the first streak of dawn, Heracles awoke, and at once noticed that the cattle were
missing. After searching for them in vain, he was about to drive the remainder onward, when
one of the stolen heifers mewed hungrily. Heracles traced the sound to the cave, but found the
entrance barred by a rock which ten yoke of oxen could hardly have moved; nevertheless, he
heaved it aside as though it had been a pebble and, undaunted by the smoky flames which
Cacus was now belching, grappled with him and battered his face to pulp.
n. Aided by King Evander, Heracles then built an altar to Zeus, at which he sacrificed
one of the recovered bulls, and afterwards made arrangements for his own worship. Yet the
Romans tell this story in order to glorify themselves; the truth being that it was not Heracles
who killed Cacus, and offered sacrifices to Zeus, but a gigantic herdsman named Garanus, or
Recaranus, the ally of Heracles.
o. King Evander ruled rather by personal ascendancy than by force: he was
particularly reverenced for the knowledge of letters which he had imbibed from his prophetic
mother, the Arcadian nymph Nicostrate, or Themis; she was a daughter of the river Ladon,
and though already married to Echenus, bore Evander to Hermes. Nicostrate persuaded
Evander to murder his supposed father; and, when the Arcadians banished them both, went
with him to Italy, accompanied by a body of Pelasgians. There, some sixty years before the
Trojan War, they founded the small city of Pallantium, on the hill beside the river Tiber, later
called Mount Palatine; the site having been Nicostrate’s choice; and soon there was no more
powerful king than Evander in all Italy. Nicostrate, now called Carmenta, adapted the
thirteen-consonant Pelasgian alphabet, which Cadmus had brought back from Egypt, to form
the fifteen-consonant Latin one. But some assert that it was Heracles who taught Evander’s
people the use of letters, which is why he shares an altar with the Muses.
p. According to the Romans, Heracles freed King Evander from the tribute owed to the
Etruscans; killed King Faunus, whose custom was to sacrifice strangers at the altar of his
father Hermes; and begot Latinus, the ancestor of the Latins, on Faunus’s widow, or daughter.
But the Greeks hold that Latinus was a son of Circe by Odysseus. Heracles, at all events,
suppressed the annual Cronian sacrifice of two men, who were flung into the river Tiber, and
forced the Romans to use puppets instead; even now, in the month of May, when the moon is
full, the chief Vestal Virgin, standing on the oaken-timbered Pons Sublicius, throws
whitewashed images of old men, plaited from bulrushes, and called ‘Argives’, into the yellow
stream. Heracles is also believed to have founded Pompeii and Herculaneum; to have fought
giants on the Phlegraean Plain of Cumae; and to have built a causeway one mile long across
the Lucrine Gulf, now called the Heracleian Road, down which he drove Geryon’s cattle.
q. It is further said that he lay down to rest near the frontier of Rhegium and
Epizephyrian Locris and, being much disturbed by cicadas, begged the gods to silence them.
His prayer was immediately granted; and cicadas have never been heard since on the Rhegian
side of the river Alece, although they sing lustily on the Locrian side. One day a bull broke
away from the herd and, plunging into the sea, swam over to Sicily. Heracles, going in pursuit,
found it concealed among herds of Eryx, King of the Elymnians, a son of Aphrodite by Butes.
Eryx, who was a wrestler and a boxer, challenged him to a fighting contest. Heracles accepted
the challenge, on condition that Eryx’ stake his kingdom against the runaway bull, and won
the first events; finally, in the wrestling match, he lifted Eryx high into the air and dashed him
to the ground and killed him—which taught the Sicilians that not everyone born of a goddess
is necessarily immortal. In this manner, Heracles won Eryx’s kingdom, which he left the
inhabitants to enjoy until one of his own descendants should come to claim it.
r. Some say that Eryx—whose wrestling-ground is still shown—had a daughter named
Psophis, who bore Heracles two sons: Echephron and Promachus. Having been reared in
Erymanthus, they renamed it Psophis after their mother; and there built a shrine to Erycinian
Aphrodite, of which today only the ruins remain. The hero-shrines of Echephron and
Promachus have long since lost their importance, and Psophis is usually regarded as a
daughter of Xanthus, the grandson of Arcas.
s. Continuing on his way through Sicily, Heracles came to a plain where now stands
the city of Syracuse; there he offered sacrifice and instituted the annual festival beside the
sacred chasm of Cyane, through which Hades snatched Core to the Underworld. To those who
honoured Heracles in the Plain of Leontini, he left undying memorial of his visit. Close to the
city of Agyrium, the hoof marks of his cattle has been found imprinted on a stony road, as
though in wax; and, regarded as an intimation of his own immortality, Heracles accepted from
inhabitants those divine honours which he had hitherto consistently refused. Then, in
acknowledgement of their favours, he dug a lake of four furlongs in circumference outside the
city walls, and established sanctuaries of Iolaus and Geryon.
t. Returning to Italy in search of another route to Greece, He drove his cattle up the
eastern coast, to the Lacinian Promontory, where the ruler, King Lacinius, was afterwards
able to boast that he had put Heracles to flight; this he did merely by building a temple to
Hera, at the sight of which Heracles departed in disgust. Six miles farther on, Heracles
accidentally killed one Croton, buried him with every honour, and prophesied that, in time to
come, a great city would rise, called by his name. This prophecy Heracles made good after his
deification: he appeared in a dream to one of his descendants, the Argive Myscelus,
threatening him with terrible punishments if he did not lead a party of colonists to Sicily and
found the city; and when the Argives were about to condemn Myscelus to death for defying
their embargo on emigration, he miraculously turned every black voting-pebble into a white
one.
u. Heracles then proposed to drive Geryon’s cattle through Istria into Epirus, and
thence to the Peloponnese by way of the Isthmus. But at the head of the Adriatic Gulf Hera
sent a gadfly, which stampeded the cows, driving them across Thrace and into the Scythian
desert. There Heracles pursued them, and one cold, stormy night drew the lion pelt about him
and fell fast asleep on a rocky hillside. When he awoke, he found that his chariot-mares,
which he had unharnessed and put out to graze, were likewise missing. He wandered far and
wide in search of them until he reached the wooded district called Hylaea, where a strange
being, half woman, half serpent, shouted at him from a cave. She had his mares, she said, but
would give them back to him only if he became her lover. Heracles agreed, though with a
certain reluctance, and kissed her thrice; whereupon the serpent-tailed woman embraced him
passionately, and when, at last, he was free to go, asked him: ‘What of the three sons whom I
now carry in my womb? When they grow to manhood, shall I settle them here where I am
mistress, or shall I send them to you?’
v. ‘When they grow up, watch carefully!’ Heracles replied. ‘And if ever one of them
bends this bow—thus, as I now bend it—and girds himself with this belt’—thus, as I now gird
myself—choose him as the ruler of your country.’ So saying, he gave her one of his two bows,
and his girdle which had a golden goblet hanging from its clasp; then went on his way. She
named her triplets Agathyrsus, Gelonus, and Scythes. The eldest two were unequal to the
tasks that their father had set, and she drove them away; but Scythes succeeded in both and
was allowed to remain, thus becoming the ancestor of all royal Scythian kings who, to this
day, wear golden goblets on their girdles. Others, however, say that it was Zeus, not Heracles,
who lay with the serpent-tailed woman, and that, when his three sons by her were still ruling
the land, there fell from the sky four golden implements: a plough, a yoke, a battle axe, and a
cup. Agathyrsus first ran to recover them, but as he came close, the gold flamed up and burned his hands. Gelonus was similarly rejected. However, when Scythes, the youngest,
approached, the fire died down at once; whereupon he carried home the four golden treasures
and the elder brothers agreed to yield him the kingdom.
w. Heracles, having recovered his mares and most of the strayed cattle, drove them back
across the river Strymon, which he clammed with stones for the purpose, and encountered no
further adventures until the giant herdsman Alcyoneus, having taken possession of the
Corinthian Isthmus, hurled a rock at the army which once more followed Heracles, crushing
no less than twelve chariots and double that number of horsemen. This was the same
Alcyoneus who twice stole Helius’s sacred cattle: from Erytheia, and from the citadel of
Corinth. He now ran forward, picked up the rock again, and this time hurled it at Heracles,
who bandied it back with his club and so killed the giant; the very rock is still shown on the
Isthmus.


THE APPLES OF HESPERIDES

HERACLES had performed these Ten Labours in the space of eight years and one
month; but Eurystheus, discounting the Second and the Fifth, set him two more. The Eleventh
Labour was to fetch fruit from the golden apple-tree, Mother Earth’s wedding gift to Hera,
with which she had been so delighted that she planted it in her own divine garden. This
garden lay on the slopes of Mount Atlas, where the panting chariot-horses of the Sun
complete their journey, and where Atlas’s sheep and cattle, one thousand herds of each,
wander over their undisputed pastures. When Hera found, one day, that Atlas’s daughters, the
Hesperides, to whom she had entrusted the tree, were pilfering the apples, she set the ever-
watchful dragon Ladon to coil around the tree as its guardian.
b. Some say that Ladon was the offspring of Typhon and Echidne; others, that he was
the youngest-born of Ceto and Phorcys; others again, that he was a parthogenous son of
Mother Earth. He had one hundred heads, and spoke with diverse tongues.
c. It is equally disputed whether the Hesperides lived on Mount Atlas in the Land of
the Hyperboreans; or on Mount Atlas in Mauretania; or somewhere beyond the Ocean stream;
or on two islands near the promontory called the Western Horn, which lies close to the
Ethiopian Hesperiae, on the borders of Africa. Though the apples were Hera’s, Atlas took a
gardener’s pride in them and, when Themis warned him: ‘One day long hence, Titan, your
tree shall be stripped of its gold by a son of Zeus,’ Atlas, who had not then been punished
with his terrible task of supporting the celestial globe upon his shoulders, built solid walls
around the orchard, and expelled all strangers from his land; it may well have been he who set
Ladon to guard the apples.
d. Heracles, not knowing in what direction the Garden of the Hesperides lay, marched
through Illyria to the river Po, the home of the oracular sea-god Nereus. On the way he
crossed the Echedorus, a small Macedonian stream, where Cycnus, the son of Ares and
Pyrene, challenged him to a duel. Ares acted as Cycnus’s second, and manhailed the
combatants, but Zeus hurled a thunderbolt between them and they broke off the fight. When
at last Heracles came to the Po, the river-nymphs, daughters of Zeus and Themis, showed him
Nereus asleep. He seized the hoary old sea-god and, clinging to him despite his many Protean
changes, forced him to prophesy how the golden apples could be won. Some say, however,
that Heracles went to Prometheus for this information.
e. Nereus had advised Heracles not to pluck the apples himself, but to employ Atlas as
his agent, meanwhile relieving him of his fantastic burden; therefore, on arriving at the
Garden of the Hesperides, he asked Atlas to do him this favour. Atlas would have undertaken
almost any task for the sake of an hour’s respite, but he feared Ladon, whom Heracles
thereupon killed with an arrow shot over the garden wall. Heracles now bent his back to
receive the weight of the celestial globe, and Atlas walked away, returning presently with
three apples plucked by his daughters. He found the sense of freedom delicious. ‘I will take
these apples to Eurystheus myself without fail,’ he said, ‘if you hold up the heavens for a few months longer.’ Heracles pretended to agree but, having been warned by Nereus not to accept
any such offer, begged Atlas to support the globe for only one moment more, while he put a
pad on his head. Atlas, easily deceived, laid the apples on the ground and resumed his burden;
whereupon Heracles picked them up and went away with an ironical farewell.
f. After some months Heracles brought the apples to Eurystheus, who handed them
back to him; he then gave them to Athene, and she returned them to the nymphs, since it was
unlawful that Hera’s property should pass from their hands. Feeling thirsty after this Labour,
Heracles stamped his foot and made a stream of water gush out, which later saved the lives of
the Argonauts when they were cast up high and dry on the Libyan desert. Meanwhile Hera,
weeping for Ladon, set his image among the stars as the constellation of the Serpent.
g. Heracles did not return to Mycenae by a direct route. He first traversed Libya,
whose King Antaeus, son of Poseidon and Mother Earth, was in the habit of forcing strangers
to wrestle with him until they were exhausted, whereupon he killed them; for not only was he
a strong and skilful athlete, but whenever he touched the earth, his strength revived. He saved
the skulls of his victims to roof a temple of Poseidon. It is not known whether Heracles, who
was determined to end this barbarous practice, challenged Antaeus, or was challenged by him.
Antaeus, however, proved no easy victim, being a giant who lived in a cave beneath a
towering cliff, where he feasted on the flesh of lions, and slept on the bare ground in order to
conserve and increase his already colossal strength. Mother Earth, not yet sterile after her
birth of the Giants, had conceived Antaeus in a Libyan cave, and found more reason to boast
of him than even of her monstrous elder children, Typhon, Tityus, and Briareus. It would
have gone ill with the Olympians if he had fought against them on the Plains of Phlegra.
h. In preparation for the wrestling match, both combatants cast off their lion pelts, but
while Heracles rubbed himself with oil in the Olympic fashion, Antaeus poured hot sand over
his limbs lest contact with the earth through the soles of his feet alone should prove
insufficient. Heracles planned to preserve his strength and wear Antaeus down, but after
tossing him full length on the ground, he was amazed to see the giant’s muscles swell and a
healthy flush suffuse his limbs as Mother Earth revived him. The combatants grappled again,
and presently Antaeus flung himself down of his own accord, not waiting to be thrown; upon
which, Heracles, realizing what he was at, lifted him high into the air, then cracked his ribs
and, despite the hollow groans of Mother Earth, held him aloft until he died.
i. Some say that this conflict took place at Lixus, a small Mauretanian city some fifty
miles from Tangier, near the sea, where a hillock is shown as Antaeus’s tomb. If a few
basketsful of soil are taken from this hillock, the natives believe, rain will fall and continue to
fall until they are replaced. It is also claimed that the Gardens of the Hesperides were the
near-by island, on which stands an altar of Heracles; but, except for a few wild-olive trees, no
trace of the orchard now remains. When Sertorius took Tangier, he opened the tomb to see
whether Antaeus’s skeleton were as large as tradition described it. To his astonishment, it
measured sixty cubits, so he at once closed up the tomb and offered Antaeus heroic sacrifices.
It is said locally either that Antaeus founded Tangier, formerly called Tingis; or that Sophax,
whom Tinga, Antaeus’s widow, bore to Heracles, reigned over that country, and gave his
mother’s name to the city. Sophax’s son Diodorus subdued many African nations with a
Greek army recruited from the Mycenaean colonists whom Heracles had settled there. The
Mauretanians are of eastern origin and, like the Pharusii, descended from certain Persians
who accompanied Heracles to Africa; but some hold that they are descendants of those
Canaanites whom Joshua the Israelite expelled from their country.
j. Next, Heracles visited the Oracle at Ammon, where he asked for an interview with
his father Zeus; but Zeus was loth to reveal himself and, when Heracles persisted, flayed a
ram, put on the fleece, with the ram’s head hiding his own, and issued certain instructions.
Hence the Egyptians give their images of Zeus Ammon a ram’s face. The Thebans sacrifice rams only once a year when, at the end of Zeus’s festival, they slay a single ram and use its
fleece to cover Zeus’s image; after which the worshippers beat their breasts in mourning for
the victim, and bury it in a sacred tomb.
k. Heracles then struck south, and founded a hundred-gated city, named Thebes in
honour of his birthplace; but some say that Osiris had already founded it. All this time, the
King of Egypt was Antaeus’s brother Busiris, a son of Poseidon by Lysianassa, the daughter
of Epaphus or, as others say, by Anippe, a daughter of the river Nile. Now, Busiris’s kingdom
had once been visited with drought and famine for eight or nine years, and he had sent for
Greek augurs to give him advice. His nephew, a learned Cyprian seer, named Phrasius,
Thrasius, or Thasius, son of Pygmalion, announced that the famine would cease if every year
one stranger were sacrificed in honour of Zeus. Busiris began with Phrasius himself, and
afterwards sacrificed to him chance guests, until the arrival of Heracles, who let the priests
hale him off to the altar. They bound his hair with a fillet, and Busiris, calling upon the gods,
was about to raise the sacrificial axe, when Heracles burst his bonds and slew Busiris,
Busiris’s son Amphidamas, and all the priestly attendants.
l. Next, Heracles traversed Asia and put in at Thermydrae, the harbour of Rhodian
Lindus, where he unyoked one of the bullocks from a farmer’s cart, sacrificed it, and feasted
on its flesh, while the owner stood upon a certain mountain and cursed him from afar. Hence
the Lindians still utter curses when they sacrifice to Heracles. Finally he reached the Caucasus
Mountains, where Prometheus had been lettered for thirty years—or one thousand, or thirty
thousand years—while every day a griffon-vulture, born of Typhon and Echidne, tore at his
liver. Zeus had long repented of his punishment, because Prometheus had since sent him a
kindly warning not to marry Thetis, lest he might beget one greater than himself; and now,
when Heracles pleaded for Prometheus’s pardon, granted this without demur. Having once,
however, condemned him to everlasting punishment, Zeus stipulated that, in order still to
appear a prisoner, he must wear a ring made from his chains and set with Caucasian stone—
and this was the first ring ever to contain a setting. But Prometheus’s sufferings were destined
to last until some immortal should voluntarily go to Tartarus in his stead; so Heracles
reminded Zeus of Cheiron, who was longing to resign the gift of immortality ever since he
had suffered his incurable wound. Thus no further impediment remained, and Heracles,
invoking Hunter Apollo, shot the griffon-vulture through the heart and set Prometheus free.
m. Mankind now began to wear rings in Prometheus’s honour, and also wreaths;
because when released, Prometheus was ordered to crown himself with a willow wreath, and
Heracles, to keep him company, assumed one of wild-olive.
n. Almighty Zeus set the arrow among the stars as the constellation Sagitta; and to this
day the inhabitants of the Caucasus Mountains regard the griffon-vulture as the enemy of
mankind. They burn out its nests with flaming darts, and set snares for it to avenge
Prometheus’s suffering.


THE CAPTURE OF CERBERUS

HERACLES’S last, and most difficult, Labour was to bring the dog Cerberus up from
Tartarus. As a preliminary, he went to Eleusis where he asked to partake of the Mysteries and
wear the myrtle wreath. Nowadays, any Greek of good repute may be initiated at Eleusis, but
since in Heracles’s day Athenians alone were admitted, Theseus suggested that a certain
Pylius should adopt him. This Pylius did so and when Heracles had been purified for his
slaughter of the Centaurs, because no one with blood-stained hands could view the Mysteries,
he was duly initiated by Orpheus’s son Musaeus, Theseus acting as his sponsor. However,
Eumolpus, the founder of the Greater Mysteries, had decreed that no foreigners should be
admitted, and therefore the Eleusinians, loth to refuse Heracles’s request, yet doubtful
whether his adoption by Pylius would qualify him as a true Athenian, established the Lesser
Mysteries on his account; others say that Demeter herself honoured him by founding the
Lesser Mysteries on this occasion.
b. Every year, two sets of Eleusinian Mysteries are held: the Greater in honour of
Demeter and Core, and the Lesser in honour of Core alone. These Lesser Mysteries, a
preparation for the Greater, are a dramatic reminder of Dionysus’s fate, performed by the
Eleusinians at Agrae on the river Ilissus in the month Anthesterion. The principal rites are the
sacrifice of a sow, which the initiates first wash in the river Cantharus, and their subsequent
purification by a priest who bears the name Hydranus. They must then wait at least one year
until they may participate in the Greater Mysteries, which are held at Eleusis itself in the
month Boedromion; and must also take an oath of secrecy, administered by the mystagogue,
before being prepared for these. Meanwhile, they are refused admittance to the sanctuary of
Demeter, and wait in the vestibule throughout the solemnities.
c. Thus cleansed and prepared, Heracles descended to Tartarus from Laconian
Taenarum; or, some say, from the Acherusian peninsula near Heracleia on the Black Sea,
where marks of his descent are still shown at a great depth. He was guided by Athene and
Hermes—for whenever, exhausted by his Labours, he cried out in despair to Zeus, Athene
always came hastening down to comfort him. Terrified by Heracles’s scowl, Charon fortied
him across the river Styx without demur; in punishment of which irregularity he was lettered
by Hades for one entire year. As Heracles stepped ashore from the crazy boat, all the ghosts
fled, except Meleager and the Gorgon Medusa. At sight of Medusa he drew his sword, but
Hermes reassured him that she was only a phantom; and when he aimed an arrow at Meleager,
who was wearing bright armour, Meleager laughed. ‘You have nothing to fear from the dead,’
he said, and they chatted amicably for awhile, Heracles offering in the end to marry
Meleager’s sister Deianeira.
d. Near the gates of Tartarus, Heracles found his friends Theseus and Peirithous
fastened to cruel chairs, and wrenched Theseus free, but obliged to leave Peirithous behind;
next, he rolled away the stone under which Demeter had imprisoned Ascalaphus; and then,
wishing to gratify the ghosts with a gift of warm blood, slaughtered one Hades’s cattle. Their
herdsman, Menoetes, or Menoetus, the son Ceuthonymus, challenged him to a wrestling
match, but was seized around the middle and had his ribs crushed. At this, Persephone, who
came out from her palace and greeted Heracles like a brother, intervened and pleaded for
Menoetes’s life.
e. When Heracles demanded Cerberus, Hades, standing by his wife’s side, replied
grimly: ‘He is yours, if you can master him without using your club or your arrows.’ Heracles
found the dog chained to the gate of Acheron, and resolutely gripped him by the throat—from
which rose three heads, each maned with serpents. The barbed tail flew up strike, but Heracles,
protected by the lion pelt, did not relax his grip until Cerberus choked and yielded.
f. On his way back from Tartarus, Heracles wove himself a wreath from the tree which
Hades had planted in the Elysian Fields as a mere memorial to his mistress, the beautiful
nymph Leuce. The outer leaves of the wreath remained black, because that is the colour of the
Underworld, but those next to Heracles’s brow were bleached silver-white by his glorious
sweat. Hence the white poplar, or aspen, is sacred to him: colour signifying that he has
laboured in both worlds.
g. With Athene’s assistance, Heracles recrossed the river Styx safely, and then half-
dragged, half-carried Cerberus up the chasm in Troezen, through which Dionysus had
conducted his mother Semele. In the temple of Saviour Artemis, built by Theseus over the
mouth this chasm, altars now stand sacred to the infernal deities. At Troezen also, a fountain
discovered by Heracles and called after him is shown front of Hippolytus’s former palace.
h. According to another account, Heracles dragged Cerberus, born with adamantine
chains, up a subterrene path which leads to the gloomy cave of Acone, near Mariandyne on
the Black Sea. As Cerberus resisted averting his eyes from the sunlight, and barking furiously
with all three mouths, his slaver flew across the green fields and gave birth to poisonous plant
aconite, also called hecateis, because Hecate was the first to use it. Still another account is
that Heracles came back to the upper air through Taenarum, famous for its cave-like temple
with an image of Poseidon standing before it; but if a road ever led thence to the Underworld,
it has since been blocked up. Finally, some say that reemerged from the precinct of
Laphystian Zeus, on Mount Laphystius, where stands an image of Bright-eyed Heracles.
i. Yet all agree at least that, when Heracles brought Cerberus to Mycenae, Eurystheus,
who was offering a sacrifice, handed him a slave’s portion, reserving the best cuts for his own
kinsmen; and that Heracles showed his just resentment by killing three of Eurystheus’s sons:
Perimedes, Eurybius, and Eurypilus.
j. Besides the aconite, Heracles also discovered the following simples: the all-heal heracleon,
or ‘wild origanum’; the Siderian heracleon, with its thin stem, red flower, and leaves like the
coriander’s, which grows near lakes and rivers, and is an excellent remedy for all wounds
inflicted by iron; and the hyoscyamos, or henbane, which causes vertigo and insanity. The
Nymphaean heracleon, which has a club-like root, was named after a certain nymph deserted
by Heracles, who died of jealousy; it makes men impotent for the space of twelve days.


THE MURDER Of IPHITUS

WHEN Heracles returned to Thebes after his Labours, he gave Megara, his wife, now
thirty-three years old, in marriage to his nephew and charioteer Iolaus, who was only sixteen,
remarking that his own union with her had been inauspicious. He then looked about for a
younger and more fortunate wife; and, hearing that his friend Eurytus, a son of Melanius,
King of Oechalia, had offered to marry his daughter Iole to any archer who could outshoot
him and his four sons, took the road there. Eurytus had been given a fine bow and taught its
use by Apollo himself, whom he now claimed to surpass in marksmanship, yet Heracles
found no difficulty in winning the contest. The result displeased Eurytus excessively and,
when he learned that Heracles had discarded Megara after murdering her children, he refused
to give him Iole. Having drunk a great deal of wine to gain confidence, ‘You could never compare with me and my sons as an archer,’ he told Heracles, ‘were it not that you unfairly
use magic arrows, which cannot miss their mark. This contest is void, and I would not, in any
case, entrust my beloved daughter to such a ruffian as yourself! Moreover, you are
Eurystheus’s slave and, like a slave, deserve only blows from a free man.’ So saying, he drove
Heracles out of the Palace. Heracles did not retaliate at once, as he might well have done; but
swore to take vengeance.
b. Three of Eurytus’s sons, namely Didaeon, Clytius, and Toxeus, had supported their
father in his dishonest pretensions. The eldest, however, whose name was Iphitus, declared
that Iole should in all fairness have been given to Heracles; and when, soon afterwards,
twelve strong-hooved brood-mares and twelve sturdy mule-foals disappeared from Euboea,
he refused to believe that Heracles was the thief. As a matter of fact, they had been stolen by
the well-known thief Autolycus, who magically changed their appearance and sold them to
the unsuspecting Heracles as if they were his own. Iphitus followed the tracks of the mares
and foals and found that they led towards Tiryns, which made him suspect that Heracles was,
after all, avenging the insult offered him by Eurytus. Coming suddenly face to face with
Heracles, who had just returned from his rescue of Alcestis, he concealed his suspicious and
merely asked for advice in the matter. Heracles did not recognize the beasts from Iphitus’s
description as those sold to him by Autolycus, and with his usual heartiness promised to
search for them if Iphitus would consent to become his guest. Yet he now divined that he was
suspected of theft, which galled his sensitive heart. After a grand banquet, he led Iphitus to
the top of the highest tower in Tiryns.
‘Look about you!’ he demanded, ‘and tell me whether your mares are grazing
anywhere in sight.’
‘I cannot see them,’ Iphitus admitted.
‘Then you have falsely accused me in your heart of being a thief!’ Heracles roared,
distraught with anger, and hurled him to his death.
c. Heracles presently went to Neleus, King of Pylus, and asked to be purified; but
Neleus refused, because Eurytus was his ally. Nor would any of his sons, except the youngest,
Nestor, consent to receive Heracles, who eventually persuaded Deiphobus, the son of
Hippolytus, to purify him at Amyclae. However, he still suffered from evil dreams, and went
to ask the Delphic Oracle how he might be rid of them. The Pythoness Xenoclea refused to
answer this question.
‘You murdered your guest,’ she said. ‘I have no oracles for such as you!’
‘Then I shall be obliged to institute an oracle of my own!’ cried Heracles. With that,
he plundered the shrine of its votive offerings and even pulled away the tripod on which
Xenoclea sat.
‘Heracles of Tiryns is a very different man from his Canopic namesake,’ the Pythoness
said severely as he carried the tripod from the shrine; she meant that the Egyptian Heracles
had once come to Delphi and behaved with courtesy reverence.
d. Up rose the indignant Apollo, and fought Heracles until Zeus parted the combatants
with a thunderbolt, making them clasp hands in friendship. Heracles restored the sacred tripod,
and together they founded the city of Gythium, where images of Apollo, Heracles, Dionysus
now stand side by side in the market place. Xenoclea then gave Heracles the following oracle:
‘To be rid of your affliction you must be sold into slavery for one whole year and the
price you fetch must be offered to Iphitus’s children. Zeus is enraged that you hay violated the
laws of hospitality, whatever the provocation.’
‘Whose slave am I to be?’ asked Heracles humbly.
‘Queen Omphale of Lydia will purchase you,’ Xenoclea replied.
‘I obey,’ said Heracles, ‘but on day I shall enslave the man who has brought this
suffering upon me and all his family too!’ Some, however, say that Heracles did not return the tripod and that, when one thousand years later, Apollo heard that it had been taken to the
city of Pheneus, he punished the Pheneans by blocking the channel which Heracles had dug to
carry the heavy rains, and flooded their city.
e. Another wholly different account of these events is current according to which
Lycus the Euboean, son of Poseidon and Dirce attacked Thebes during a time of sedition,
killed King Creon, an, usurped the throne. Believing Copreus’s report that Heracles had died,
Lycus tried to seduce Megara and, when she resisted him, would have killed her and the
children had Heracles not returned from Tartarus in time to exact vengeance. Thereupon Hera,
whose favourite Lycus was, drove Heracles mad: he killed Megara and his own sons, also the
Aetolian Stichius. The Thebans, who show the children’s tomb, say that Heracles would have
killed his foster-father Amphitryon as well, if Athene had not knocked him insensible with a
hug stone; to which they point, saying: ‘We nick-name it “The Chaste her”.’ But Amphitryon
had, in fact, died long before, in the Orchomenan campaign. The Athenians claim that
Theseus, grateful to Heracles for his rescue from Tartarus, arrived at this juncture with
Athenian army, to help Heracles against Lycus. He stood aghast at the murder, yet promised
Heracles every honour for the rest of his life, and after his death as well, and brought him to
Athens, where Medea cured his madness with medicines. Sicalus then purified him once more.


OMPHALE

HERACLES was taken to Asia and offered for sale as a nameless slave by Hermes,
patron of all important financial transactions, who afterwards handed the purchase money of
three silver talents to Iphitus’s orphans. Nevertheless, Eurytus stubbornly forbade his
grandchildren to accept any monetary compensation, saying that only blood would pay for
blood; and what happened to the silver, Hermes alone knows. As the Pythoness had foretold,
Heracles was bought by Omphale, Queen of Lydia, a woman with a good eye for a bargain;
and he served her faithfully either for one year, or for three, ridding Asia Minor of the bandits
who infested it.
b. This Omphale, a daughter of Jordanes and, according to some authorities, the
mother of Tantalus, had been bequeathed the kingdom by her unfortunate husband Tmolus,
son of Ares and Theogone. While out hunting on Mount Carmanorium—so called in honour
of Carmanor son of Dionysus and Alexirrhoë, who was killed there by a wild boar—he fell in
love with a huntress named Arrhippe, a chaste attendant of Artemis. Arrhippe, deaf to
Tmolus’s entreaties, fled to her mistress’s temple where, disregarding its sanctity, he ravished
her on the goddess’s own couch. She hanged herself from a beam, after invoking Artemis,
who thereupon let loose a mad bull; Tmolus was tossed into the air, fell on pointed stakes and
sharp stones and died in torment. Theoclymenus, his son by Omphale, buried him where he
lay, renaming the mountain ‘Tmolus’; a city of the same name, built upon its slopes, was
destroyed by a great earthquake in the reign of the Emperor Tiberius.
c. Among the many bye-works which Heracles performed during this servitude was
his capture of the two Ephesian Cercopes, who had constantly robbed him of his sleep. They
were twin brothers named either Passalus and Acmon; or Oius and Eurybatus; or Sillus and
Triballus—sons of Oceanus by Theia, and the most accomplished cheats and liars known to
mankind, who roamed the world, continually practising new deception. Theia had warned
them to keep clear of Heracles and her words ‘My little White-bottoms, you have yet to meet
the great Black-bottom!’ becoming proverbial, ‘white-bottom’ now means ‘cowardly, or
lascivious’. They would buzz around Heracles’s bed in the guise of bluebottles, until one
night he grabbed them, forced them to resume their proper shape, and bore them off, dangling
head-downwards from a pole which he carried over his shoulder. Now, Heracles’s bottom,
which the lion’s pelt did not cover, had been burned as black as an old leather by exposure to
sun, and by the fiery breaths of Cacus and of the Cretan bull; and the Cercopes burst into a fit
of immoderate laughter to find themselves suspended upside-down, staring at it. Their
merriment surprised Heracles, and when he learned its cause, he sat down upon a rock and
laughed so heartily himself that they persuaded him to release them. But though we know of
an Asian city named Cercopia, the haunts of the Cercopes and a rock called ‘Black Bottom’
are shown at Thermopylae; this incident therefore is likely to have taken place on another
occasion.
d. Some say that the Cercopes were eventually turned to stone for trying to deceive
Zeus; others, that he punished their fraudulence by changing them into apes with long yellow
hair, and sending them to the Italian islands named Pithecusae.
e. In a Lydian ravine lived one Syleus, who used to seize passing strangers and force
them to dig his vineyard; but Heracles tore up the vines by their roots. Again, when Lydians
from Itone began plundering Omphale’s country, Heracles recovered the spoil and razed their
city. And at Celaenae lived Lityerses the farmer, a bastard son of King Minos, who would
offer hospitality to wayfarers but force them to compete with him in reaping his harvest. If
their strength flagged, he would whip them and at evening, when he had won the contest,
would behead them and conceal their bodies in sheaves, chanting lugubriously as he did so.
Heracles visited Celaenae in order to rescue the shepherd Daphnis, a son of Hermes who, after
searching throughout the world for his beloved Pimplea, carried off by pirates, had at last
found her among the slave-girls of Lityerses. Daphnis was challenged to the reaping contest,
but Heracles taking his place outreaped Lityerses, whom he decapitated with a sickle,
throwing the trunk into the river Maeander. Not only did Daphnis win back his Pimplea, but
Heracles gave her Lityerses’s palace as a dowry. In honour of Lityerses, Phrygian reapers still
sing a harvest dirge closely resembling that raised in honour of Maneros, son of the first
Egyptian king, who also died in the harvest field.
f. Finally, beside the Lydian river Sagaris, Heracles shot dead a gigantic serpent which
was destroying men and crops; and the grateful Omphale, having at last discovered his
identity and parentage, released him and sent him back to Tiryns, laden with gifts; while Zeus
contrived the constellation Ophiuchus to commemorate the victory. This river Sagaris, by the
way, was named after a son of Myndon and Alexirrhoë who, driven mad by the Mother of the
Gods for slighting her Mysteries and insulting her eunuch priests, drowned himself in its
waters.
g. Omphale had bought Heracles as a lover rather than a fighter. He fathered on her
three sons, namely Lamus; Agelaus, ancestor of a famous King Croesus who tried to
immolate himself on a pyre when the Persians captured Sardis; and Laomedon. Some add a
fourth, Tyrrhenus, or Tyrsenus, who invented the trumpet and led Lydian emigrants to Etruria,
where they took the name Tyrrhenians; but it is more probable that Tyrrhenus was the son of
King Atys, and a remote descendant of Heracles and Omphale. By one of Omphale’s women,
named Malis, Heracles was already the father of Cleodaeus, or Cleolaus; and of Alcaeus,
founder of the Lydian dynasty which King Croesus ousted from the throne of Sardis.
h. Reports reached Greece that Heracles had discarded his lion pelt and his aspen
wreath, and instead wore jewelled necklaces, golden bracelets, a woman’s turban, a purple
shawl, and a Maeonian girdle. There he sat—the story went—surrounded by wanton Ionian
girls, teasing wool from the polished wool-basket, or spinning the thread; trembling, as he did
so, when his mistress scolded him. She would strike him with her golden slipper if ever his
clumsy fingers crushed the spindle, and make him recount his past achievements for her
amusement; yet apparently he felt no shame. Hence painters show Heracles wearing a yellow
petticoat, and letting himself be combed and manicured by Omphale’s maids, while she
dresses up in his lion pelt, and wields his club and bow.
i. What, however, had happened was no more than this. One day, when Heracles and
Omphale were visiting the vineyards of Tmolus, she in a purple, gold-embroidered gown,
with perfumed locks, he gallantly holding a golden parasol over her head, Pan caught sight of
them from a high hill. Falling in love with Omphale, he bade farewell to the mountain-
goddesses, crying: ‘Henceforth she alone shall be my love!’ Omphale and Heracles reached
their destination, a secluded grotto, where it amused them to exchange clothes. She dressed
him in a net-work girdle, absurdly small for his waist, and her purple gown. Though she
unlaced this to the fullest extent, he split the sleeves; and the ties of her sandals were far too
short to meet across his instep.
j. After dinner, they went to sleep on separate couches, having vowed a dawn sacrifice to
Dionysus, who requires marital purity from his devotees on such occasions. At midnight, Pan crept into the grotto and, fumbling about in the darkness, found what he thought was
Omphale’s couch, because the sleeper was clad in silk. With trembling hands he untucked the
bed-clothes from the bottom, and wormed his way in; but Heracles, waking and drawing up
one foot, kicked him across the grotto. Hearing a loud crash and a howl, Omphale sprang up
and called for lights, and when these came she and Heracles laughed until they cried to see
Pan sprawled in a comer, nursing his bruises. Since that day, Pan has abhorred clothes, and
summons his officials naked to his rites; it was he who revenged himself on Heracles by
spreading the rumour that his whimsical exchange of garments with Omphale was habitual
and perverse.


HESIONE

AFTER serving as a slave to Queen Omphale, Heracles returned to Tiryns, his sanity
now fully restored, and at once planned an expedition against Troy. His reasons were as
follows. He and Telamon, either on their way back from the country of the Amazons, or when
they landed with the Argonauts at Sigeium, had been astonished to find Laomedon’s daughter
Hesione, stark naked except for her jewels, chained to a rock on the Trojan shore. It appeared
that Poseidon had sent a sea-monster to punish Laomedon for having failed to pay him and
Apollo their stipulated fee when they built the city walls and tended his flocks. Some say that
he should have sacrificed to them all the cattle born in his kingdom that year; others, that he
had promised them only a low wage as day-labourers, but even so cheated them of more than
thirty Trojan drachmae. In revenge, Apollo sent a plague, and Poseidon ordered this monster
to prey on the plains folk and ruin their fields by spewing sea water over them. According to
another account, Laomedon fulfilled his obligations to Apollo, but not to Poseidon, who
therefore sent the plague as well as the monster.
b. Laomedon visited the Oracle of Zeus Ammon, and was advised by him to expose
Hesione on the seashore for the monster to devour. Yet he obstinately refused to do so unless
the Trojan nobles would first let him sacrifice their own daughters. In despair, they consulted
Apollo who, being no less angry than Poseidon, gave them little satisfaction. Most parents at
once sent their children abroad for safety, but Laomedon tried to force a certain Phoenodamas,
who had kept his three daughters at home, to expose one of them; upon which Phoenodamas
harangued the assembly, pleading that Laomedon was alone responsible for their present
distress, and should be made to suffer for it by sacrificing his daughter. In the end, it was
decided to cast lots, and the lot fell upon Hesione, who was accordingly bound to the rock,
where Heracles found her.
c. Heracles now broke her bonds, went up to the city, and offered to destroy the
monster in return for the two matchless, immortal, snow-white horses, or mares, which could
run over water and standing corn like the wind, and which Zeus had given Laomedon as
compensation for the rape of Ganymedes. Laomedon readily agreed to the bargain.
d. With Athene’s help, the Trojans then built Heracles a high wall which served to
protect him from the monster as it poked its head out of the sea and advanced across the plain.
On reaching the wall, it opened its great jaws and Heracles leaped fully-armed down its throat.
He spent three days in the monster’s belly, and emerged victorious, although the struggle had
cost him every hair on his head.
e. What happened next is much disputed. Some say that Laomedon gave Hesione to
Heracles as his bride—at the same time persuading him to leave her, and the mares, at Troy, while he went off with the Argonauts—but that, after the Fleece had been won, his cupidity
got the better of him, and he refused to let Heracles have either Hesione or the mares. Others
say that he had made this refusal a month or two previously, when Heracles came to Troy in
search of Hylas.
f. The most circumstantial version, however, is that Laomedon cheated Heracles by
substituting mortal horses for the immortal ones; whereupon Heracles threatened to make war
on Troy, and put to sea in a rage. First he visited the island of Paros, where he raised an altar
to Zeus and Apollo; and then the Isthmus of Corinth, where he prophesied Laomedon’s doom;
finally he recruited soldiers in his own city of Tiryns.
. 4. Laomedon, in the meantime, had killed Phoenodarnas and sold his three daughters
to Sicilian merchants which come to buy victims for the wild-beast shows; but in Sicily they
were rescued by Aphrodite, and the eldest, Aegesta, lay with the river Crimissus, who took
the form of a dog—and bore him a son, Aegestes, called Acestes by the Latins. This Aegestes,
aided by Anchises’s bastard son Elymus, whom he brought from Troy, founded the cities of
Aegesta, later called Segesta Entella, which he named after his wife; Eryx; and Asea. Aegesta
is said to have eventually returned to Troy and there married one Capys, to whom she became
the mother of Anchises.
h. It is disputed whether Heracles embarked for Troy with eighteen long ships of fifty
oars each; or with only six small craft and scanty forces. But among his allies were Iolaus;
Telamon son of Aeacus; Peleus; the Argive Oides; and the Boeotian Deimachus.
i. Heracles had found Telamon at Salamis feasting with his friends. He was at once
offered the golden wine-bowl and invited to pour the first libation to Zeus; having done so, he
stretched out his hands to heaven and prayed: ‘O Father, send Telamon a fine son, with a skin
as tough as this lion pelt, and courage to match!’ For he saw that Periboea Telamon’s wife,
was on the point of giving birth. Zeus sent down his eagle in answer, and Heracles assured
Telamon that the prayer would be granted; and, indeed, as soon as the feast was over,
Periboea gave birth to Great Ajax, around whom Heracles threw the lion pelt, thus making
him invulnerable, except in his neck and armpit, where the quiver had interposed.
j. On disembarking near Troy, Heracles left Oides to guard the ships, while he himself
led the other champions in an assault on the city. Laomedon, taken by surprise, had no time to
marshal his army, but supplied the common folk with swords and torches and hurried then
down to build the fleet. Oides resisted him to the death, fighting a noble rear-guard action,
while his comrades launched the ships and escaped Laomedon then hurried back to the city
and, after a skirmish with Heracles’s straggling forces, managed to re-enter and bar the gate
behind him.
k. Having no patience for a long siege, Heracles ordered an immediate assault. The
first to breach the wall and enter was Telamon, who chose the western curtain built by his
father Aeacus as the weakest spot, but Heracles came hard at his heels, mad with jealousy.
Telamon, suddenly aware that Heracles’s drawn sword was intended for his own vitals, had
the presence of mind to stoop and collect some large stones dislodged from the wall. ]What
are you at?’ roared Heracles. ‘Building an altar to Heracles the Victor, Heracles the Averter of
Illness!’ answered the resourceful Telamon. ‘I leave the sack of Troy to you.’ Heracles
thanked him briefly, and raced on. He then shot down Laomedon and all his sons, except
Podarces, who alone had maintained that Heracles should be given the immortal mares; and
sacked the city. After glutting his vengeance, he rewarded Telamon with the hand of Hesione,
whom he gave permission to ransom any one of her fellow captives. She chose Podarces.
‘Very well,’ said Heracles. ‘But first he must be sold as a slave.’ So Podarces was put up for
sale, and Hesione redeemed him with the golden veil which bound her head: hence Podarces
won the name of Priam, which means ‘redeemed’. But some say that he was a mere infant at
the time.
l. Having burned Troy and left its highways desolate, Heracles set Priam on the throne,
and put to sea. Hesione accompanied Telamon to Salamis, where she bore him Teucer;
whether in wedlock or in bastardy is not agreed. Later she deserted Telamon, escaped to Asia
Minor, and swam across to Miletus, where King Arion found her hidden in a wood. There she
bore Telamon a second son, Trambelus, whom Arion reared as his own, and appointed king of
Telamon’s Asiatic kinsmen the Lelegians or, some say, of the Lesbians. When, in the course
of the Trojan War, Achilles raided Miletus, he killed Trambelus, learning too late that he was
Telamon’s son, which caused him great grief.
m. Some say that Oides did not fall at Troy, but was still alive when five Erinnyes
drove his grandson Alcmaeon mad. His tomb is shown in Arcadia, near the Megalopolitan
precinct of Boreas.
n. Heracles now sailed from the Troad, taking with him Glaucia, a daughter of the
river Scamander. During the siege, she had been Deimachus’s mistress, and when he fell in
battle, had applied to Heracles for protection. Heracles led her aboard his ship, overjoyed that
the stock of so gallant a friend should survive: for Glaucia was pregnant, and later gave birth
to a son named Scamander.
o. Now, while Sleep lulled Zeus into drowsiness, Hera summoned Boreas to raise a
storm, which drove Heracles far off his course to the island of Cos. Zeus awoke in a rage and
threatened to cast Sleep down from the upper air into the gulf of Erebus; but she fled as a
suppliant to Night, whom even Zeus dared not displease. In his frustration he began tossing
the gods about Olympus. Some say that it was on this occasion that he chained Hera by her
wrists to the rafters, tying anvils to her ankles; and hurled Hephaestus down to earth. Having
thus vented his ill-temper to the full, he rescued Heracles from Cos and led him back to Argos,
where his adventures are variously described.
p. Some say that the Coans mistook him for a pirate and tried to prevent his approach
by pelting his ship with stones. But he forced a landing, took the city of Astypalaea in a night
assault, and killed the king, Eurypylus, a son of Poseidon and Astypalaea. He was himself
wounded by Chalcodon, but rescued by Zeus when on the point of being despatched. Others
say that he attacked Cos because he had fallen in love with Chalciope, Eurypylus’s daughter.
q. According to still another account, five of Heracles’s six ships foundered in the
storm. The surviving one ran aground at Laceta on the island of Cos, he and his shipmates
saving only their weapons from the wreck. As they stood wringing the sea water out of their
clothes, a flock of sheep passed by, and Heracles asked the Meropian shepherd, one
Antagoras, for the gift of a ram; whereupon Antagoras, who was of powerful build,
challenged Heracles to wrestle with him, offering the ram as a prize. Heracles accepted the
challenge but, when the two champions came to grips, Antagoras’s Meropian friends ran to
his assistance, and the Greeks did the same for Heracles, so that a general roughwand-tumble
ensued. Exhausted by the storm and by the number of his enemies, Heracles broke off the
fight and fled to the house of a stout Thracian matron, in whose clothes he disguised himself,
thus contriving to escape.
r. Later in the day, refreshed by food and sleep, he fought the Meropians again and
worsted them; after which he was purified of their blood and, still dressed in women’s clothes,
married Chalciope, by whom he became the father of Thessalus. Annual sacrifices are now
offered to Heracles on the field where this battle was fought; and Coan bridegrooms wear
women’s clothes when they welcome their brides home—as the priest of Heracles at
Antimacheia also does before he begins a sacrifice.
s. The women of Astypalaea were offended at Heracles, and abused him, whereupon
Hera honoured them with horns like cows; but some say that this was a punishment inflicted
on them by Aphrodite for daring to extol their beauty above hers.
t. Having laid waste Cos, and all but annihilated the Meropians, Heracles was guided by
Athene to Phlegra, where he helped the gods to win their battle against the giants. Thence he
came to Boeotia where, at his insistence, Scamander was elected king. Scamander renamed
the river Inachus after himself, and a near-by stream after his mother Glaucia; he also named
the spring Acidusa after his wife, by whom he had three daughters, still honoured locally
under the name of ‘Maidens’.


THE CONQUEST OF ELIS

NOT long after his return, Heracles collected a force of Tirynthians and Arcadians and,
joined by volunteers from the noblest Greek families, marched against Augeias, King of Elis,
whom he owed a grudge on account of the Fifth Labour. Augeias, however, foreseeing this
attack, had prepared to resist it by appointing as his generals Eurytus and Cteatus, the sons of
his brother Actor and Molione, or Moline, a daughter of Molus; and by giving a share in the
Elean government to the valiant Amarynceus, who is usually described as a son of the
Thessalian immigrant Pyttius.
b. The sons of Actor are called Moliones, or Molionides, after their mother, to
distinguish them from those of the other Actor, who married Aegina. They were twins, born
from a silver egg, and surpassed all their contemporaries in strength; but, unlike the Dioscuri,
had been joined together at the waist from birth. The Moliones married the twin daughters of
Dexamenus the Centaur and, one generation later, their sons reigned in Elis jointly with
Augeias’s grandson and Amarynceus’s son. Each of these four commanded ten ships in the
expedition to Troy. Actor already possessed a share of the kingdom through his mother
Hyrmine, a daughter of Neleus, whose name he gave to the now vanished city of Hyrmine.
c. Heracles did not cover himself with glory in this Elean War. He fell sick, and when
the Moliones routed his army, which was encamped. In the heart of Elis, the Corinthians
intervened by proclaiming the Isthmian Truce. Among those wounded by the Moliones was
Heracles’s twin brother Iphicles; his friends carried him fainting to Phencus in Arcadia, where
he eventually died and became a hero. Three hundred and sixty Cleonensians also died
bravely, fighting at Heracles’s side; to them he ceded the honours awarded him by the
Nemeans after he had killed the lion. He now retired to Olenus, the home of his friend
Dexamenus, father-in-law of the Moliones, whose youngest daughter Deianeira he deflowered,
after promising to marry her. When Heracles had passed on, the Centaur Eurytion asked for
her hand, which Dexamenus feared to refuse him; but on the wedding day Heracles
reappeared without warning, shot down Eurytion and his brothers, and took Deianeira away
with him. Some say, however, that Heracles’s bride was named Mnesimache, or Hippolyte;
on the ground that Deianeira is more usually described as the daughter of Oeneus. Dexamenus
had been born at Bura, famous for its dice-oracle of Heracles.
d. When Heracles returned to Tiryns, Eurystheus accused him of designs on the high
kingship in which he had himself been confirmed by Zeus, and banished him from Argolis.
With his mother Alcmene, and his nephew Iolaus, Heracles then rejoined Iphicles at Pheneus,
where he took Laonome, daughter of Guneus, as his mistress. Through the middle of the
Pheneatian Plain, he dug a channel for the river Aroanius, some fifty furlongs long and as
much as thirty feet deep; but the river soon deserted this channel, which has caved in here and
there, and returned to its former course. He also dug deep chasms at the foot of the Phenean
Mountains to carry off flood water; these have served their purpose well, except that on one
occasion, after a cloud-burst, the Aroanius rose and inundated the ancient city of Pheneus—
the high-water marks of this flood are still shown on the mountainside.
e. Afterwards, hearing that the Eleans were sending a procession to honour Poseidon
at the Third Isthmian Festival, and that the Moliones would witness the games and take part in
the sacrifices, Heracles ambushed them from a roadside thicket below Cleonae, and shot both
dead; and killed their cousin, the other Eurytus, as well, a son of King Augeias.
f. Molione soon learned who had murdered her sons, and made the Eleans demand
satisfaction from Eurystheus, on the ground that Heracles was a native of Tiryns. When
Eurystheus disclaimed responsibility for the misdeeds of Heracles, whom he had banished,
Molione asked the Corinthians to exclude all Argives from the Isthmian Games until
satisfaction had been given for the murder. This they declined to do, whereupon Molione laid a curse on every Elean who might take part in the festival. Her curse is still respected: no
Elean athlete will ever enter for the Isthmian Games.
g. Heracles now borrowed the black-maned horse Arion from Oncus, mastered him,
raised a new army in Argos, Thebes, and Arcadia, and sacked the city of Elis. Some say that
he killed Augeias and his sons, restored Phyleus, the rightful king, and set him on the Elean
throne; others, that he spared Augeias’s life at least. When Heracles decided to repeople Elis
by ordering the widows of the dead Eleans to lie with his soldiers, the widows offered a
common prayer to Athene that they might conceive at the first embrace. This prayer was
heard and, in gratitude, they founded a sanctuary of Athene the Mother. So widespread was
the joy at this fortunate event that the place where they had met their new husbands, and the
stream flowing by it, was called Bady, which is the Elean word for ‘sweet’. Heracles then
gave the horse Arion to Adrastus, saying that, after all, he preferred to fight on foot.
h. About this time, Heracles won his title of Buphagus, or ‘Ox-eater’. It happened as
follows. Lepreus, the son of Caucon and Astydameia, who founded the city of Lepreus in
Arcadia (the district derived its name from the leprosy which had attacked the earliest settlers),
had foolishly advised King Augeias to fetter Heracles when he asked to be paid for having
cleansed the cattle-yards. Hearing that Heracles was on his way to the city, Astydameia
persuaded Lepreus to receive him courteously and plead for forgiveness. This Heracles
granted, but challenged Lepreus to a triple contest: of throwing the discus, drinking bucket
after bucket of water, and eating an ox. Then, though Heracles won the discus-throw and the
drinking-match, Lepreus ate the ox in less time than he. Flushed with success, he challenged
Heracles to a duel, and was at once clubbed to death; his tomb is shown at Phigalia. The
Lepreans, who worship Demeter and Zeus of the White Poplar, have always been subjects of
Elis; and if one of them ever wins a prize at Olympia, the herald proclaims him an Elean from
Lepreus. King Augeias is still honoured as a hero by the Eleans, and it was only during the
reign of Lycurgus the Spartan that they were persuaded to forget their enmity of Heracles and
sacrifice to him also; by which means they averted a pestilence.
i. After the conquest of Elis, Heracles assembled his army at Pisa, and used the spoil to
establish the famous four-yearly Olympic Festival and Games in honour of his father Zeus,
which some claim was only the eighth athletic contest ever held. Having measured a precinct
for Zeus, and fenced off the Sacred Grove, he stepped out the stadium, named a neighbouring
hillock ‘The Hill of Cronus’, and raised six altars to the Olympian gods: one for every pair of
them. In sacrificing to Zeus, he burnt the victims’ thighs upon a fire of white poplar wood cut
from trees growing by the Thesprotian river Acheron; he also forreded a sacrificial hearth in
honour of his great-grandfather Pelops, and assigned him a shrine. Being much plagued by
flies on this occasion, he offered a second sacrifice to Zeus the Averter of Flies: who sent
them buzzing across the river Alpheius. The Eleans still sacrifice to this Zeus, when they
expel the flies from Olympia.
j. Now, at the first full moon after the summer solstice all was ready for the Festival,
except that the valley lacked trees to shade it from the sun. Heracles therefore returned to the
Land of the Hyperboreans, where he had admired the wild olives growing at the source of the
Danube, and persuaded Apollo’s priests to give him one for planting in Zeus’s precinct.
Returning to Olympia, he ordained that the Aetolian empire should crown the victors with its
leaves: which were to be their only reward, because he himself had performed his Labours
without payment from Eurystheus. This tree, called ‘The Olive of the Fair Crown’, still grows
in the Sacred Grove behind Zeus’s temple. The branches for the wreaths are lopped with a
golden sickle by a nobly-born boy, both of whose parents must be alive.
k. Some say that Heracles won all the events by default, because none dared compete
against him; but the truth is that every one was boldly disputed. No other contestants could,
however, be found for the wrestling match, until Zeus, in disguise, condescended to enter the ring. The match was drawn, Zeus revealed himself to his son Heracles, all the spectators
cheered, and the full moon shone as bright as day.
l. But the more ancient legend is that the Olympic Games were founded by Heracles
the Dactyl, and that it was he who brought the wild olive from the land of the Hyperboreans.
Charms and amulets in honour of Heracles the Dactyl are much used by sorceresses, who
have little regard for Heracles son of Alcmene. Zeus’s altar, which stands at an equal distance
between the shrine of Pelops and the sanctuary of Hera, but in front of both, is said to have
been built by this earlier Heracles, like the altar at Pergamus, from the ashes of the thigh-
bones he sacrificed to Zeus. Once a year, on the nineteenth day of the Elean month Elaphius,
soothsayers fetch the ashes from the Council Hall, and after moistening them with water from
the river Alpheius—no other will serve—apply a fresh coat of this plaster to the altar.
m. This is not, however, to deny that Heracles the son of Alcmene refounded the
Games: for an ancient walled gymnasium is shown at Elis, where athletes train. Tall plane-
trees grow between the running-tracks, and the enclosure is called Xystus because Heracles
exercised himself there by scraping up thistles. But Clymenus the Cretan, son of Cardis a
descendant of the Dactyl, had celebrated the Festival, only fifty years after the Deucalionian
Flood; and subsequently Endymion had done the same, and Pelops, and Amythaon son of
Cretheus, also Pelias and Neleus, and some say Augeias.
n. The Olympic Festival is held at an interval alternately of forty-nine and fifty months,
according to the calendar, and now lasts for five days: from the eleventh to the fifteenth of the
month in which it happens to fall. Heralds proclaim an absolute armistice throughout Greece
for the whole of this month, and no athlete is permitted to attend who has been guilty of any
felony or offence against the gods. Originally, the Festival was managed by the Pisans; but,
after the final return of the Heraclids, their Aetolian allies settled in Elis and were charged
with the task.
o. On the northern side of the Hill of Cronus, a serpent called Sosipolis is housed in
Eileithyia’s shrine; a white-veiled virgin-priestess feeds it with honey-cakes and water. This
custom commemorates a miracle which drove away the Arcadians when they fought against
the holy land of Elis: an unknown woman came to the Elean generals with a suckling child
and gave it to them as their champion. They believed her, and when she sat the child down
between the two armies, it changed into a serpent; the Arcadians fled, pursued by the Eleans,
and suffered fearful losses. Eileithyia’s shrine marks the place where the serpent disappeared
into the Hill of Cronus. On the summit, sacrifices are offered to Cronus at the spring equinox
in the month of Elaphius, by priestesses known as ‘Queens’.


THE CAPTURE OF PYLLIS

HERACLES next sacked and burned the city of Pylus, because the Pylians had gone
to the aid of Elis. He killed all Neleus’s sons, except the youngest, Nestor, who was away at
Gerania, but Neleus himself escaped with his life.
b. Athene, champion of justice, fought for Heracles; and Pylus was defended by Hera,
Poseidon, Hades, and Ares. While Athene engaged Ares, Heracles made for Poseidon, club
against trident, and forced him to give way. Next, he ran to assist Athene, spear in hand, and
his this way lunge-pierced Ares’s shield, dashing him headlong to the ground; then with a
powerful thrust at Ares’s thigh, he drove deep into the divine flesh. Ares fled in anguish to Olympus, where Apollo spread soothing unguents on the wound and healed it within the hour;
so he renewed the fight, until one of Heracles’s arrows pierced his shot-rider, and forced him
off the field for good. Meanwhile, Heracles had also wounded Hera in the right breast with a
three-barbed arrow.
e. Neleus’s eldest son, Periclymenus the Argonaut, was gifted by Poseidon with
boundless strength and the power of assuming whatever shape he pleased, whether of bird,
beast, or tree. On this occasion he turned himself first into a lion, then into a serpent and after
a while, to escape scrutiny, perched on the yoke—boss of Heracles’s horses in the form of an
ant, or fly, or bee. Heracles, nudged by Athene, recognized Periclymenus and reached for his
club, whereupon Periclymenus became an eagle, and tried to peck out his eyes, but a sudden
arrow from Heracles’s bow pierced him underneath his wing. He tumbled to earth, and the
arrow was driven through his neck by the fall, killing him. Some say, however, that he flew
away in safety; and that Heracles had attacked Poseidon on an earlier occasion, after the
murder of Iphitus, when Neleus refused to purify him; and that the fight with Hades took
place at the other Pylus, in Elis, when Heracles was challenged for carrying off Cerberus
without permission.
d. Heracles gave the city of Messene to Nestor, in trust for his own descendants,
remembering that Nestor had taken no part in robbing him of Geryon’s cattle; and soon came
to love him more even than Hylas and Iolaus. It was Nestor who first swore an oath by
Heracles.
e. The Eleans, though they themselves rebuilt Pylus, took advantage of the Pylians’
weakness to oppress them in petty ways. Neleus kept his patience until one day, having sent a
chariot and a prize-winning team of four horses to contest for a tripod in the Olympic Games,
he learned that Augeias had appropriated them and sent the charioteer home on foot. At this,
he ordered Nestor to make a retaliatory raid on the Elean Plain; and Nestor managed to drive
away fifty herds of cattle, fifty flocks of sheep, fifty droves of swine, fifty flocks of goats, and
one hundred and fifty chestnut mares, many with foal, beating off the Eleans who opposed
him and blooding his spear in this his first fight. Neleus’s heralds then convoked all in Pylus
who were owed a debt by the Eleans, and when he had divided the booty among the claimants,
keeping back the lion’s share for Nestor, sacrificed lavishly to the gods. Three days later, the
Eleans advanced on Pylus in full array—among them the two orphaned sons of the Moliones,
who had inherited their title—and crossed the Plain from Thryoessa. But Athene came by
night to warn and marshal the Pylians; and when battle had been joined, Nestor, who was on
foot, struck down Amarynceus, the Elean commander and, seizing his chariot, rushed like a
black tempest through the Elean ranks, capturing fifty other chariots and killing a hundred
men. The Moliones would also have fallen to his busy spear, had not Poseidon wrapped them
in an impenetrable mist and spirited them away. The Eleans, hotly pursued by Nestor’s army,
fled as far as the Olenian Rock, where Athene called a halt.
f. A truce being then agreed upon, Amarynceus was buried at Buprasium, and awarded
funeral games, in which numerous Pylians took part. The Moliones won the chariot race by
crowding Nestor at the turn, but he is said to have won all the other events: the boxing and the
wrestling match, the foot-race and the javelin-throw. Of these feats, it is only fight to add,
Nestor himself, in garrulous old age, was the principal witness; since by the grace of Apollo,
who granted him the years of which his maternal uncles had been deprived, he lived for three
centuries, and no contemporary survived to gainsay him.


AUGE

ALEUS, king of Tegea, the son of Apheidas, married Neaera, a daughter of Pereus,
who bore him Auge, Cepheus, Lycurgus, and Aphidamas. An ancient shrine of Athene Alta,
founded at Tegea by Aleus, still contains a sacred couch of the goddess.
b. When, on a visit to Delphi, Aleus was warned by the Oracle that Neaera’s two
brothers would die by the hand of her daughter’s son, he hurried home and appointed Auge a
priestess of Athene, threatening to kill her if she were unchaste. Whether Heracles came to
Tegea on his way to fight King Augeias, or on his return from Sparta, is disputed; at all events,
Aleus entertained him hospitably in Athene’s temple. There, flushed with wine, Heracles
violated the virgin-priestess beside a fountain which is still shown to the north of the shrine;
since, however, Auge made no outcry, it is often suggested that she came there by assignation.
c. Heracles continued on his way, and at Stymphalus begot Eures on Parthenope, the
daughter of Stymphalus; But meanwhile pestilence and famine came upon Tegea, and Aleus,
informed by the Pythoness that a crime had been committed in Athene’s sacred precinct,
visited it and found Auge far gone with child. Though she wept and declared that Heracles
had violated her in a fit of drunkenness, Aleus would not believe this, He dragged her to the
Tegean market place, where she fell upon her knees at the site of the present temple of
Eileithyia, famed for its image of ‘Auge on her Knees’. Ashamed to kill his daughter in public,
Aleus engaged King Nauplius to drown her. Nauplius accordingly set out with Auge for
Nauplia; But on Mount Parthenius she was overtaken by labour-pangs, and made some excuse
to turn aside into a wood. There she gave birth to a son and, hiding him in a thicket, returned
to where Nauplius was patiently waiting for her by the roadside. However, having no
intention of drowning a princess when he could dispose of her at a high price in the slave-
market, he sold Auge to some Carian merchants who had just arrived at Nauplia and who, in
turn, sold her to Teuthras, king of Mysian Teuthrania.
d. Auge’s son was suckled by a doe on Mount Parthenius (where he now has a sacred
precinct) and some cattle-men found him, named him Telephus, and took him to their master,
King Corythus. At the same time, by a coincidence, Corythus’s shepherds discovered
Atalanta’s intent son, whom she had borne to Meleager, exposed on the same hillside: they
named him Parthenopaeus, which is ‘son of a pierced maidenhead’, because Atalanta was
pretending to be still a virgin.
e. When Telephus grew to manhood, he approached the Delphic Oracle for news of his
parents. He was told: ‘Sail and seek King Teuthras the Mysian.’ In Mysia he found Auge,
now married to Teuthras, from whom he learned that she was his mother and Heracles his
father; and this he could well believe, for no woman had ever borne Heracles a son so like himself. Teuthras thereupon gave Telephus daughter Argiope in marriage, and appointed him
heir to the kingdom.
f. Others say that Telephus, after having killed Hippothous and Nereus, his maternal
uncles, went silent and speechless to Mysia in search of his mother. ‘The silence of Telephus’
became proverbial; but Parthenopaeus came with him as spokesman. It happened that the
renowned Argonaut Idas, son of Aphareus, was about to seize the Mysian throne, and
Teuthras in desperation promised to resign it to Telephus and give him his adopted daughter
in marriage, if only Idas were driven away. Thereupon Telephus, with Parthenopaeus’s help,
routed Idas in a single battle. Now, Teuthras’s adopted daughter happened to be Auge, who
did not recognize Telephus, nor did he know that she was his mother. Faithful to Heracles’s
memory, she took a sword into her bedroom on the wedding night, and would have killed
Telephus when he entered, had not the gods sent a large serpent between them. Auge threw
down the sword in alarm and confessed her murderous intentions. She then apostrophized
Heracles; and Telephus, who had been on the point of matricide, was inspired to cry out: ‘O
mother, mother!’ They fell weeping into each other’s arms and, the next day, returned with
Teuthras’s blessing to their native land. Auge’s tomb is shown at Pergamus beside the river
Caicus. The Pergamenians claim to be Arcadian emigrants who crossed to Asia with Telephus,
and offer him heroic sacrifices.
g. Others say that Telephus married Astyoche, or Laodice, a daughter of Trojan Priam.
Others, again, that Heracles had lain with Auge at Troy when he went there to fetch
Laomedon’s immortal horses. Still others, that Aleus locked Auge and her infant in an ark,
which he committed to the waves; and that, under Athene’s watchful care, the chest drifted
towards Asia Minor and was cast ashore at the mouth of the river Caicus, where King
Teuthras married Auge and adopted Telephus.
h. This Teuthras, hunting on Mount Teuthras, once pursued a monstrous boar, which
fled to the temple of Orthosian Artemis. He was about to force his way in, when the boar
cried out: ‘Spare me, my lord! I am the Goddess’s nursling!’ Teuthras paid no attention, and
killed it, thereby offending Artemis so deeply that she restored the boar.


DEIANEIRA

AFTER spending four years in Pheneus, Heracles decided to leave the Peloponnese.
At the head of a large Arcadian force, he sailed across to Clayton in Aeolian, where he took
up his residence. Having now no legitimate sons, and no wife, he courted Deianeira, the
supposed daughter of Oeneus, thus keeping his promise to the ghost of her brother Meleager.
But Deianeira was really the daughter of the god Dionysus, by Oeneus’s wife Althaea, as had
become apparent when Meleager died and Artemis turned his lamenting sisters into guinea-
fowl; for Dionysus then persuaded Artemis to let Deianeira and her sister Gorge retain their
human shapes.
b. Many suitors came to Oeneus’s palace in Pleuron, demanding the hand of lovely
Deianeira, who drove a chariot and practised the art of war; but all abandoned their claims
when they found themselves in rivalry with Heracles and the River-god Achelous. It is
common knowledge that immortal Achelous appears in three forms: as a bull, as a speckled
serpent, and as a bull-headed man. Streams of water flow continually from his shaggy beard,
and Deianeira would rather have died than marry him.
c. Heracles, when summoned by Oeneus to plead his suit, boasted that if he married
Deianeira, she would not only have Zeus for a father-in-law, but enjoy the reflected glory of
his own Twelve Labours. Achelous (now in bull-headed form) scoffed at this, remarking that
he was a well-known personage, the father of all Greek waters, not a footloose stranger like
Heracles, and that the Oracle of Dodona had instructed all visitants to offer him sacrifices.
Then he taunted Heracles: ‘Either you are not Zeus’s son, or your mother is an adulteress!’
Heracles scowled. ‘I am better at fighting than debating,’ he said, ‘and I will not hear my
mother insulted!’
d. Achelous cast aside his green garment, and wrestled with Heracles until he was
thrown on his back, whereupon he deftly turned into a speckled serpent and wriggled away. ‘I
strangled serpents in my cradle!’ laughed Heracles, stooping to grip his throat. Next,
Achelous became a bull and charged; Heracles nimbly stepped aside and, catching hold of
both his horns, hurled him to the ground with such force that the right horn snapped clean off.
Achelous retired, miserably ashamed, and hid his injury under a chaplet of willow-branches.
Some say that Heracles returned the broken horn to Achelous in exchange for the horn of
Goat Amaltheia; and some, that it was changed into Amaltheia’s by the Naiads, and that
Heracles presented it to Oeneus as a bridal gift. Others say that in the course of his Twelfth
Labour, he took the horn down to Tartarus, filled by the Hesperides with golden fruit and now
called the Cornucopia, for Plutus, Tyche’s assistant.
e. After marrying Deianeira, Heracles marched with the Calydonians against the
Thesprotian city of Ephyra—later Cichyerus—he overcame and killed King Phyleus. Among the captives was Phyleus’s daughter Astyoche, by whom Heracles became the father of
Tlepolemus; though some say that Tlepolemus’s mother was Astidameia, daughter of
Amyntor, whom Heracles abducted in Ephyra, a city famous for its poisons.
f. On the advice of an Oracle, Heracles now sent word to his friend Thespius: ‘Keep
seven of your sons in Thespiae, send three to Thebes and order the remaining forty to
colonize the island of Sardinia.’ Thespius obeyed. Descendants of those who went to Thebes
are honoured there; and descendants of those who stayed behind in Thespiae, the so-called
Demuchi, governed the city until recently. The forces led to Sardinia by Iolaus included
Thespian and Athenian contingents, this being the first Greek colonial expedition in which
kings came of different stock from the common people. After defeating the Sardinians in
battle, Iolaus divided the island into provinces, planted olive-trees, and made it so fertile that
the Carthaginians have since been prepared to undergo immense troubles to come in its
possession. He founded the city of Olbia, and encouraged the Athenians to found that of
Ogryle. With the consent of the sons of Thespius, who regarded Iolaus as their second father,
he called the colonists after himself, Iolarians; and they still sacrifice to Father Iolaus, as
Persians do to Father Cyrus. It has been said that Iolaus returned to Greece, by way of Sicily,
where some of his supporters settled and awarded him hero rites; but according to the
Thebans, who should know, none of the colonists ever came back.
g. At a feast three years later, Heracles grew enraged with young kinsman of Oeneus,
variously named Eunomus, Eurynomus, Eunomus Archias, or Chaerias, the son of Architeles,
who was reluctant to pour water on Heracles’s hands, and clumsily splashed it on his legs.
Heracles boxed the boy’s ears harder than he intended, and killed him. Even if forgiven by
Architeles for this accident, Heracles decided due penalty of exile, and went away with
Deianeira, ant Hyllus, to Trachis, the home of Amphitryon’s nephew Ceyx.
h. A similar accident had occurred at Phlius, a city which lies east of Arcadia, when
Heracles returned from the Garden of Hesperides. Disliking the drink set before him, he
struck Cyathus, the cupbearer, with one finger only, but killed him none the less. A chapel to
Cyathus’s memory has been built against Apollo’s Phlian temple.
i. Some say that Heracles wrestled against Achelous before the murder of Iphitus,
which was the cause of his removal to Trachis; others, that he went there when first exiled
from Tiryns. At all events, he came with Deianeira to the river Evenus, then in full flood,
where the Centaur Nessus, claiming that he was the gods’ authorized ferryman and chosen
because of his righteousness, offered, for a small fee, to carry Deianeira dry-shod across the
water while Heracles swam. He agreed, paid Nessus the fare, threw his club and bow over the
river, and plunged in. Nessus, however, instead of keeping to his bargain, galloped off in the
opposite direction with Deianeira in his arms; then threw her to the ground and tried to violate
her. She screamed for help, and Heracles, quickly recovering his bow, took careful aim and
pierced Nessus through the breast from half a mile away.
j. Wrenching out the arrow, Nessus told Deianeira: ‘If you mix the seed which I have
spilt on the ground with blood from my wound, add olive oil, and secretly anoint Heracles’s
shirt with the mixture, you will never again have cause to complain of his unfaithfulness.’
Deianeira hurriedly collected the ingredients in a jar, which she sealed and kept by her
without saying a word to Heracles on the subject.
k. Another version of the story is that Nessus offered Deianeira wool soaked in his
own blood, and told her to weave it into a shirt for Heracles. A third version is that he gave
her his own blood-stained shirt as a love-charm, and then fled to a neighbouring tribe of
Locrians, where he died of the wound; but his body rotted unburied, at the foot of Mount
Taphiassus, tainting the country with its noisome smell—hence these Locrians are called
Ozolian. The spring beside which he died still smells foetid and contains dots of blood.
l. By Deianeira, Heracles had already become the father of Hyllus, Ctesippus, Glenus,
and Hodites; also of Macaria, his only daughter.


THE ARGONAUTS ASSEMBLE

AFTER the death of King Cretheus the Aeolian, Pelias, son of Poseidon, already an
old man, seized the Iolcan throne from his half-brother Aeson, the rightful heir. An oracle
presently warning him that he would be killed by a descendant of Aeolus, Pelias put to death
every prominent Aeolian he dared lay hands upon, except Aeson, whom he spared for his
mother Tyro’s sake, but kept a prisoner in the palace; forcing him to renounce his inheritance.
b. Now, Aeson had married Polymele, also known as Amphinome, Perimede,
Alcimede, Polymede, Polypheme, Scarphe, or Arne, who bore him one son, by name
Diomedes. Pelias would have destroyed the child without mercy, had not Polymele
summoned her kinswomen to weep over him, as though he were still-born, and then smuggled
him out of the city to Mount Pelion; where Cheiron the Centaur reared him, as he did before,
or afterwards, with Asclepius, Achilles, Aeneas, and other famous heroes.
c. A second oracle warned Pelias to beware a one-sandalled man and when, one day
on the seashore, a group of his princely allies joined him in a solemn sacrifice to Poseidon, his
eye fell upon a tall, long-haired Magnesian youth, dressed in a close-fitting leather tunic and a
leopard-skin. He was armed with two broad-bladed spears, and wore only one sandal.
d. The other sandal he had lost in the muddy river Anaurus—which some miscall the
Evenus, or Enipeus—by the contrivance of a crone who, standing on the farther bank, begged
passers-by to carry her across. None took pity on her, until this young stranger courteously
offered her his broad back; but he found himself staggering under the weight, since she was
none other than the goddess Hera in disguise. Pelias had vexed Hera by withholding her
customary sacrifices, and she was determined to punish him for this neglect.
e. When, therefore, Pelias asked the stranger roughly: ‘Who are you, and what is your
father’s name?’, he replied that Cheiron, his foster-father, called him Jason, though he had
formerly been known as Diomedes, son of Aeson. Pelias glared at him balefully.
’What would you do,’ he enquired suddenly, ‘if an oracle announced that one of your
fellow-citizens were destined to kill you?’
‘I should send him to fetch the golden ram’s fleece from Colchis,’ Jason replied, not
knowing that Hera had placed those words in his mouth. ‘And, pray, whom have I the honour
of addressing?’
f. When Pelias revealed his identity, Jason was unabashed. He boldly claimed the
throne usurped by Pelias, though not the flocks and herds which had gone with it; and since
he was strongly supported by his uncle Pheres, king of Pherae, and Amathaon, king of Pylus,
who had come to take part in the sacrifice, Pelias feared to deny him his birthright. ‘But first,’
he insisted, ‘I require you to free our beloved country from a curse!’
g. Jason then learned that Pelias was being haunted by the ghost of Phrixus, who had
fled from Orchomenus a generation before, riding on the back of a divine ram, to avoid being
sacrificed. He took refuge in Colchis where, on his death, he was denied proper burial; and,
according to the Delphic Oracle, the land of Iolcus, where many of Jason’s Minyan relatives
were settled, would never prosper unless his ghost were brought home in a ship, together with
the golden ram’s fleece. The fleece now hung from a tree in the grove of Colchian Ares,
guarded night and day by an unsleeping dragon. Once this pious feat had been accomplished,
Pelias declared, he would gladly resign the kingship, which was becoming burdensome for a
man of his advanced years.
h. Jason could not deny Pelias this service, and therefore sent heralds to every court of
Greece, calling for volunteers who would sail with him. He also prevailed upon Argus the
Thespian to build him a fifty-oared ship; and this was done at Pagasae, with seasoned timber from Mount Pelion; after which Athene herself fitted an oracular beam into the Argo’s prow,
cut from her father Zeus’s oak at Dodona.
i. Many different muster-rolls of the Argonauts—as Jason’s companions are called—
have been compiled at various times; but the following names are those given by the most
trustworthy authorities.


THE SEIZURE OF THE FLEECE

IN Olympus, Hera and Athene were anxiously debating how their favourite, Jason,
might win the golden fleece. At last they decided to approach Aphrodite, who undertook that
her naughty little son Eros would make Medea, King Aeëtes’s daughter, conceive a sudden
passion for him. Aphrodite found Eros rolling dice with Ganymedes, but cheating at every
throw, and begged him to let fly one of his arrows at Medea’s heart. The payment she offered
was a golden ball enamelled with blue rings, formerly the infant Zeus’s plaything; when
tossed into the air, it left a track like a falling star. Eros eagerly accepted this bribe, and
Aphrodite promised her fellow-goddesses to keep Medea’s passion glowing by means of a
novel charm: a live wryneck, spread-eagled to a firewheel.
b. Meanwhile, at the council of war held in the backwater, Jason proposed going with
Phrixus’s sons to the near-by city of Colchian Aea, where Aeëtes ruled, and demanding the fleece as a favour; only if this were denied would they resort to guile or force. All welcomed
his suggestion, and Augeias, Aeëtes’s half-brother, joined the party. They approached Aea by
way of Circe’s riverside cemetery, where male corpses wrapped in untanned ox-hides were
exposed on the tops of willow-trees for birds to eat—the Colchians bury only female corpses.
Aea shone splendidly down on them from a hill, sacred to Helius, Aeëtes’s father, who
stabled his white horses there. Hephaestus had built the royal palace in gratitude for Helius’s
rescue of him when overwhelmed by the Giants during their assault on Olympus.
c. King Aeëtes’s first wife, the Caucasian nymph Asterodeia, mother of Chalciope,
Phrixus’s widow, and of Medea, Hecate’s witch-priestess, was dead some years before this;
and his second wife, Eidyia, had now borne him a son, Apsyrtus.
d. As Jason and his companions approached the palace, they were met first by
Chalciope, who was surprised to see Cytisorus and her other three sons returning so soon and,
when she heard their story, showered thanks on Jason for his rescue of them. Next came
Aeëtes, accompanied by Eidyia and showing great displeasure—for Laomedon had
undertaken to prevent all Greeks from entering the Black Sea—and asked Aegeus, his
favourite grandson, to explain the intrusion. Aegeus replied that Jason, to whom he and his
brothers owed their lives, had come to fetch away the golden fleece in accordance with an
oracle. Seeing that Aeëtes’s face wore a look of fury, he added at once: ‘In return for which
favour, these noble Greeks will gladly subject the Sauromatians to your Majesty’s rule.’
Aeëtes gave a contemptuous laugh, then ordered Jason—and Augeias, whom he would not
deign to acknowledge as his brother—to return whence they came, before he had their
tongues cut out and their hands lopped off.
e. At this point, the princess Medea emerged from the palace, when Jason answered
gently and courteously, Aeëtes, ashamed of himself, undertook to yield the fleece, though on
seemingly impossible terms. Jason must yoke two fire-breathing brazen-hoofed bulls,
creations of Hephaestus; plough the Field of Ares to extent of four plough gates; and then sow
it with the serpent’s teeth given him by Athene, a few left over from Cadmus’s sowing at
Thebes. Jason stood stupefied, wondering how to perform these unheard-of feats, but Eros
aimed one of his arrows at Medea, and drove it into her heart, up to the feathers.
f. Chalciope, visiting Medea’s bedroom that evening, to help on behalf of Cytisorus
and his brothers, found that she had fallen head over heels in love with Jason. When
Chalciope offered herself to go-between, Medea eagerly undertook to help him yoke the
breathing bulls and win the fleece; making it her sole condition that should sail back in the
Argo as his wife.
g. Jason was summoned, and swore by all the gods of Olympus to keep faith with
Medea for ever. She offered him a flask of lotion, blood-red juice of the two-sulked, saffron-
coloured Caucasian crocus, which would protect him against the bulls’ fiery breath; this
potent first sprang from the blood of the tortured Prometheus. Jason gratefully accepted the
flask and, after a libation of honey, unstoppered it bathed his body, spear and shield in the
contents. He was thus able to subdue the bulls and harness them to a plough with an yoke. All
day he ploughed, and at nightfall sowed the teeth, which armed men immediately sprouted.
He provoked these to fight one against another, as Cadmus had done on a similar occasion,
throwing a stone quoits into their midst; then despatched the survivors.
h. King Aeëtes, however, had no intention of parting with his fleece, and shamelessly
repudiated his bargain. He threatened to burn the Argo, which was now moored off Aea, and
massacre her crew; Medea, in whom he had unwisely confided, led Jason and a part of
Argonauts to the precinct of Ares, some six miles away. There fleece hung, guarded by a
loathsome and immortal dragon of a million coils, larger than the Argo herself, and born from
the blood of the monster Typhon, destroyed by Zeus. She soothed the hissing dragon with
incantations and then, using freshly-cut sprigs of juniper, sprinkled soporific drops on his eyelids. Jason stealthily unfastened the fleece from the oak-tree, and together they hurried
down to the beach where the Argo lay.
i. An alarm had already been raised by the priests of Ares and, in a running fight, the
Colchians wounded Iphitus, Meleager, Argus, Atalanta, and Jason. Yet all of them contrived
to scramble aboard the waiting Argo, which was rowed off in great haste, pursued by Aeëtes’s
galleys. Iphitus alone succumbed to his wounds; Medea soon healed the others with
ruineraries of her own invention.
j. Now, the Sauromatians whom Jason had undertaken to conquer were descendants of
three shiploads of Amazons captured by Heracles during his Ninth Labour; they broke their
fetters and killed the sailors set as guards over them, but knowing nothing of seamanship,
drifted across to the Cimmerian Bosphorus, where they landed at Crenmi in the country of the
free Scythians. There they captured a herd of wild horses, mounted them and began to ravage
the land. Presently the Scythians, discovering from some corpses which fell into their hands
that the invaders were women, sent out a band of young men to offer the Amazons love rather
than battle. This did not prove difficult, but the Amazons consented to marry them only if
they would move to the eastern bank of the river Tanais; where their descendants, the
Sauromatians, still live and preserve certain Amazon customs, such as that every girl must
have killed a man in battle before she can find a husband.


THE MURDER OF APSYRTUS

MANY different accounts survive of the Argo’s return to Thessaly, though it is
generally agreed that, following Phineus’s advice, the Argonauts sailed counter sunwise
around the Black Sea. Some say that when Aeëtes overtook them, near the mouth of the
Danube, Medea killed her young half-brother Apsyrtus, whom she had brought aboard, and
cut him into pieces, which she consigned one by one to the swift current. This cruel stratagem
delayed the pursuit, because obliging Aeëtes to retrieve each piece in turn for subsequent
burial at Tomi. The true name of Medea’s half-brother is said to have been Aegialeus; for
‘Apsyrtus’, meaning ‘swept down’, merely records what happened to his mangled limbs after
he had died. Others place the crime at Aea itself, and say that Jason also killed Aeëtes.
b. The most circumstantial and coherent account, however, is that Apsyrtus, sent by
Aeëtes in pursuit of Jason, trapped the Argo at the mouth of the Danube, where the Argonauts
agreed to set Medea ashore on a near-by island sacred to Artemis, leaving her in charge of a
priestess for a few days; meanwhile a king of the Brygians would judge the case and decide
whether she was to return home or follow Jason to Greece, and in whose possession the fleece
should remain. But Medea sent a private message to Apsyrtus, pretending that she had been
forcibly abducted, and begging him to rescue her. That night, when he visited the island and
thereby broke the truce, Jason followed, lay in wait and struck him down from behind. He
then cut off Apsyrtus’s extremities, and thrice licked up some of the fallen blood, which he
spat out again each time, to prevent the ghost from pursuing him. As soon as Medea was once
more aboard the Argo, the Argonauts attacked the leaderless Colchians, scattered their flotilla,
and escaped.
c. Some would have it that, after Apsyrtus’s murder, the Argo turned back and sailed
up the Phasis into the Caspian Sea, and thence into the Indian Ocean, regaining the
Mediterranean by way of Lake Tritonis. Others, that she sailed up the Danube and Save, and
then down the Po, which joins the Save, into the Adriatic Sea; but was pursued by storms and
driven around the whole coast of Italy, until she reached Circe’s island of Aeaea. Others again,
that she sailed up the Danube, and then reached Circe’s island by way of the Po and the
eddying pools where is joined by the mighty Rhone.
d. Still others hold that the Argonauts rowed reached its source; then dragged the Argo
to the headwaters river which runs north into the Gulf of Finland. Or that from the Danube
they dragged her to the source of the river Elbe and, borne on its waters, reached Jutland. And
that they then shaped a westerly course towards the Ocean, passing by Britain and Ireland,
and reached Circe’s island after sailing between the Pillars of Heracles and along the coasts of
Spain and Gaul.
e. These are not, however, feasible routes. The truth is that the Argo returned by the
Bosphorus, the way she had come, and passed through the Hellespont in safety, because the
Trojans could no longer oppose her passage. For Heracles, on his return from Mysia, had
collected a fleet of six ships [supplied by the Dolionians and their Percotean allies] and,
sailing up the river Scamander under cover of darkness, surprised and destroyed the Trojan
fleet. He then battered his way into Troy with his club, and demanded from King Laomedon the man-eating mares of King Diomedes, which he had left in his charge some years
previously. When Laomedon denied any knowledge of these, Heracles killed him and all his
sons, except the infant Podarces, or Priam, whom he appointed king in his stead.
f. Jason and Medea were no longer aboard the Argo. Her oracular beam had spoken
once more, refusing to carry either of them until they had been purified of murder, and from
the mouth of the Danube they had set out overland for Aeaea, the island home of Medea’s
aunt: Circe. This was not the Campanian Acaca where Circe later went to live, but her former
Istrian seat; and Medea led Jason there by the route down which the straw-wrapped gifts of
the Hyperboreans are yearly brought to Delos. Circe, to whom they came as suppliants,
grudgingly purified them with the blood of a young sow.
g. Now, their Colchian pursuers had been warned not to come back without Medea
and the fleece and, guessing that she had gone to Circe for purification, followed the Argo
across the Aegean Sea, around the Peloponnese, and up the Illyrian coast, rightly concluding
that Medea and Jason had arranged to be fetched from Aeaea.
h. Some, however, say that Apsyrtus was still commanding the Colchian flotilla at this
time, and that Medea trapped and murdered him in one of the Illyrian islands now called the
Apsyrtides.


THE ARGO RETURNS TO GREECE

ARRIVING at Corcyra, which was then named Drepane, found the Argo beached
opposite the islet of Macris; joyfully celebrating the successful outcome of their Colchian
leader now visited King Alcinous and Queen Arëte, explaining on Aeëtes’s behalf the
surrender of Medea and the fleece. Arëte, whom Medea had appealed for protection, kept
Alcinous awake night by complaining of the ill-treatment to which fathers too often subject
their errant daughters: for instance, of Nycteus’s cruelty to Antiope, and of Acrisius’s to
Danaë. ‘Even now,’ she said, ‘that poor princess Metope languishes in an Epeirot dungeon, at
the orders of her ogreish father, King Echetus! She has been blinded with brazen spikes, and
set to grind iron barley-corns in a heavy quern: “When they are flour, I will restore your
sight,” he taunts the poor girl. Aeëtes is capable of treating this charming Medea with equal
barbarity, if you give him the chance.’
b. Arëte finally prevailed upon Alcinous to tell her what judgement he would deliver
next morning, namely: ‘If Medea is still a virgin, she shall return to Colchis; if not, she is at
liberty to stay with Jason.’ Leaving him sound asleep, Arëte sent her herald to warn Jason
what he must expect; and he married Medea without delay in the Cave of Macris, the
daughter of Aristaeus and sometime called Dionysus’s nurse. The Argonauts celebrated the
wedding with a sumptuous banquet and spread the golden fleece over the bridal couch.
Judgement was duly delivered in the morning, Jason claimed Medea as his wife, and the
Colchians could neither implement Aeëtes’s orders nor, for fear of his wrath, return home.
Some therefore settled in Corcyra, and others occupied those Illyrian islands, not far from
Circe’s Aeaea, which are now called the Apsyrtides; and afterwards built the city of Pola on
the Istrian mainland.
c. When, a year or two later, Aeëtes heard of these happenings, he nearly died of rage
and sent a herald to Greece demanding the person of Medea and requital for the injuries done
him; but was informed that no requital had yet been made for Io’s abduction by men of
Aeëtes’s race (though the truth was that she fled because a gadfly pursued her) and none
should therefore be given for the voluntary departure of Medea.
d. Jason now needed only to double Cape Malea, and return with the fleece to Iolcus.
He cruised in safety past the Islands of the Sirens, where the ravishing strains of these bird-
women were countered by the even lovelier strains of Orpheus’s lyre. Butes alone sprang
overboard in an attempt to swim ashore, but Aphrodite rescued him; she took him to Mount
Eryx by way of Lilybeum, and there made him her lover. Some say that the Sirens, who had
already lost their wings as a result of an unsuccessful singing contest with the Muses,
sponsored by Hera, committed suicide because of their failure to outcharm Orpheus; yet they
were still on their island when Odysseus came by a generation later.
e. The Argonauts then sailed in fine weather along the coast of Eastern Sicily, where
they watched the matchless white herds of Helius grazing on the shore, but refrained from
stealing any of them. Suddenly they were struck by a frightful North Wind which, in nine
days’ time, drove them to the uttermost parts of Libya; there, an enormous wave swept the
Argo over the perilous rocks which line the coast and retreated, leaving her high and dry a
mile or more inland. A lifeless desert stretched as far as the eye could see, and the Argonauts had already prepared themselves for death, when the Triple-goddess Libya, clad in goat skins,
appeared to Jason in a dream and gave him reassurance. At this, they took heart, and setting
the Argo on rollers moved her by the force of their shoulders to the salty Lake Tritonis, which
several miles off, a task that occupied twelve days. All would have died of thirst, but for a
spring which Heracles, on his way to fetch the golden apples of the Hesperides, had recently
caused to gush from the ground.
f. Canthus was now killed by Caphaurus, a Garamantian shepherd whose flocks he
was driving off, but his comrades avenged him. As hardly had the two corpses been buried
than Mopsus trod upon Libyan serpent which bit him in the heel; a thick mist spread over his
eyes, his hair fell out, and he died in agony. The Argonauts, after giving him a hero’s burial,
once more began to despair, being unable to see any outlet to the Lake.
g. Jason, however, before he embarked on this voyage, had consulted the Pythoness at
Delphi who gave him two massive brazen tripods, with one of which Orpheus now advised
him to propitiate the deities of the land. When he did so, the god Triton appeared and took up
the tripod without so much as a word of thanks, but Euphemus barred his way and asked him
politely: ‘Pray, my lord, will you kindly direct us to the Mediterranean Sea?’ For answer,
Triton merely pointed towards the Tacapae river but, as an afterthought, handed him a clod of
earth, which gave his descendants sovereignty over Libya to this day. Euphemus
acknowledged the gift with the sacrifice of a sheep, and Triton consented to draw the Argo
along by her keel, until once more she entered the Mediterranean Sea, predicting, as he went,
that when the descendant of a certain Argonaut should seize and carry off the brazen tripod
from his temple, a hundred Greek cities would rise around Lake Tritonis. The Libyan
troglodytes, overhearing these words, at once hid the tripod in the sand; and the prophecy has
not yet been fulfilled.
h. Heading northward, the Argonauts reached Crete, where they were prevented from
landing by Talos the bronze sentinel, a creation of Hephaestus, who pelted the Argo with
rocks, as was his custom. Medea called sweetly to this monster, promising to make him
immortal if he drank a certain magic potion; but it was a sleeping draught and, while he slept,
she removed the bronze nail which stoppored the single vein running from his neck to his
ankles. Out rushed the divine ichor, a colourless liquid serving him for blood, and he died.
Some, however, say that, bewitched by Medea’s eyes, Talos staggered about, grazed his heel
against a rock, and bled to death. Others, that Poeas shot him in the heel with an arrow.
i. On the following night, the Argo was caught in a storm from the south, but Jason
invoked Apollo, who sent a flash of light, revealing to starboard the island of Anaphe, one of
the Sporades, where Ancaeus managed to beach the ship. In gratitude, Jason raised an altar to
Apollo; and Medea’s twelve Phaeacian bond-maidens, given her by Queen Arëte, laughed
merrily when, for lack of a victim, he and his comrades poured water libations upon the
burning brands of the sacrifice. The Argonauts taunted them in reply, and tussled amorously
with them—a custom which survives to this day at the Autumn Festival of Anaphe.
j. Sailing to Aegina, they held a contest: as to who could first draw a pitcher of water
and carry it back to the ship; a race still run by the Aeginetans. From Aegina it was a simple
voyage to Iolcus, such as scores of ships make every year, and they made it in fair weather
without danger.
k. Some minstrels arrange these events in a different order: they say that the Argonauts
repopulated Lemnos on the homeward journey, not as they were sailing for Colchis; others,
that their visit to Libya took place before the voyage to Aea began, when Jason went in the
Argo to consult the Delphic Oracle and was driven off his course by a sudden storm. Others
again hold that they cruised down the western coast of Italy and named a harbour in the island
of Elba, where they landed, ‘Argous’ after the Argo, and that when they scraped off their
sweat on the beach, it turned into pebbles of various forms. Further, that they founded the temple of Argive Hera at Leucania; that, like Odysseus, they sailed between Scylla and
Charybdis; and that Thetis with her Nereids guided them past the flame-spouting Planctae, or
Wandering Rocks, which are now firmly anchored to the sea-bed.
l. Still others maintain that Jason and his companions explored the country about Colchian
Aea, advancing as far as Media; that one of them, Armenus, a Thessalian from Lake Boebe,
settled in Armenia, and gave his name to the entire country. This view they justify by pointing
out that the heroic monuments in honour of Jason, which Armenus erected at the Caspian
Gates, are much revered by the barbarians; and that the Armenians still wear the ancient
Thessalian dress.


THE DEATH OF PELIAS

ONE autumn evening, the Argonauts regained the well-remembered beach of Pagasae,
but found no one there to greet them. Indeed, it was rumoured in Thessaly that all were dead;
Pelias had therefore been emboldened to kill Jason’s parents, Aeson and Polymele, and an
infant son, Promachus, born to them since the departure of the Argo. Aeson, however, asked
permission to take his own life and, his plea being granted, drank bull’s blood and thus
expired; whereupon Polymele killed herself with a dagger or, some say, a rope, after cursing
Pelias, who mercilessly dashed out Promachus’s brains on the palace floor.
b. Jason, hearing this doleful story from a solitary boatman, forbade him to spread the
news of the Argo’s homecoming, and summoned a council of war. All his comrades were of
the option that Pelias served death, but when Jason demanded an immediate assault on Iolcus,
Acastus remarked that he could hardly be expected to oppose his father; and the others
thought it wiser to disperse, each to his own home and there, if necessary, raise contingents
for a war on Jason’s behalf. Iolcus, indeed, seemed too strongly garrisoned to be stormed by a
company so small as theirs.
c. Medea, however, spoke up and undertook to reduce the city single-handed. She
instructed the Argonauts to conceal their ship, on some wooded and secluded beach within
sight of Iolcus. When they saw a torch waved from the palace roof, this would mean that
Pelias was dead, the gates open, and the city theirs for the taking.
d. During her visit to Anaphe, Medea had found a hollow image of Artemis and
brought it aboard the Argo. She now dressed her twelve Phaeacian bond-maidens in strange
disguises and led them, each in turn carrying the image, towards Iolcus. On reaching the city
gates Medea, who had given herself the appearance of a wrinkled crone, ordered the sentinels
to let her pass. She cried in a shrill voice that the goddess Artemis had come from the foggy
land of the Hyperboreans, in a chariot drawn by flying serpents, to bring good fortune to
Iolcus. The startled sentinels dared not disobey, and Medea with her bond-maidens, raging
through the streets like maenads, roused the inhabitants to religious frenzy.
e. Awakened from sleep, Pelias enquired in terror what the goddess required of him.
Medea answered that Artemis was about to acknowledge his piety by rejuvenating him, and thus allowing him to beget heirs in place of the unfilial Acastus, who had lately died in a
shipwreck off the Libyan coast. Pelias doubted this promise, until Medea, by removing the
illusion of old age that she had cast about herself, turned young again before his very eyes.
‘Such is the power of Artemis!’ she cried. He then watched while she cut a bleary-eyed old
ram into thirteen pieces and boiled them in a cauldron. Using Colchian spells, which he
mistook for Hyperborean ones, and solemnly conjuring Artemis to assist her, Medea then
pretended to rejuvenate the dead ram—for a frisky lamb was hidden, with other magical gear,
inside the goddess’s hollow image. Pelias, now wholly deceived, consented to lie on a couch,
where Medea soon charmed him to sleep. She then commanded his daughters, Alcestis,
Evadne, and Amphinome, to cut him up, just as they had seen her do with the ram, and boil
the pieces in the same cauldron.
f. Alcestis piously refused to shed her father’s blood in however good a cause; but
Medea, by giving further proof of her magic powers, persuaded Evadne and Amphinome to
wield their knives with resolution. When the deed was done, she led them up to the roof, each
carrying a torch, and explained that they must invoke the Moon while the cauldron was
coming to a boil. From their ambush, the Argonauts saw the distant gleam of torches and,
welcoming the signal, rushed into Iolcus, where they met with no opposition.
g. Jason, however, fearing Acastus’s vengeance, resigned the kingdom to him, neither
did he dispute the sentence of banishment passed on him by the Iolcan Council: for he hoped
to sit upon a richer throne elsewhere.
h. Some deny that Aeson was forced to take his own life, and declare that, on the
contrary, Medea, after first draining the effete blood from his body, restored his youth by a
magic elixir, as she had also restored Macris and her sister-nymphs on Corcyra; and presented
him, stalwart and vigorous, to Pelias at the palace gates. Having thus persuaded Pelias to
undergo the same treatment, she deceived him by omitting the appropriate spells, so that he
died miserably.
i. At Pelias’s funeral games, celebrated the following day, Euphemus won the two-
horse chariot race; Polydeuces, the boxing contest; Meleager, the javelin throw; Peleus, the
wrestling match; Zetes, the shorter foot race, and his brother Calais (or, some say, Iphiclus)
the longer one; and Heracles, now returned from his visit to the Hesperides, the all-in fighting.
But during the four-horse chariot race, which Heracles’s charioteer Iolaus won, Glaucus, son
of Sisyphus, was devoured by his horses which the goddess Aphrodite had maddened with
hippomanes.
j. As for Pelias’s daughters: Alcestis married Admetus of Pherae, to whom she had
long been affected; Evadne and Amphinome were banished by Acastus to Mantinea in
Arcadia where, after purification, they succeeded in making honourable marriages.


MEDEA AT EPHYRA

JASON first visited Boeotian Orchomenus, where he hung up the golden fleece in the
temple of Laphystian Zeus; next, he beached the Argo on the Isthmus of Corinth, and there
dedicated her to Poseidon.
b. Now, Medea was the only surviving child of Aeëtes, the legitimate king of Corinth,
who when he emigrated to Colchis had his regent a certain Bunus. The throne having fallen
vacant, without issue of the usurper Corinthus, son of Marathon (calling himself ‘Son of
Zeus’), Medea claimed it, and the Corinthians happily accepted Jason as their king. But, after
reigning for ten prosperous years, he came to suspect that Medea had secured his succession
by poisoning Corinthus; and proposed to divorce her in favour the Theban Glauce, daughter
of King Creon.
c. Medea, while not denying her crime, held Jason to the oath he had sworn at Aea in
the name of all the gods, and when he protested that a forced oath was invalid, pointed out
that he also owed the throne of Corinth to her. He answered: ‘True, but the Corinth learned to
have more respect for me than for you.’ Since he didn’t recline, obdurate Medea, feigning
submission, sent Glauce a wedding gift by the hands of the royal princess—for she had borne
Jason seven daughters—namely, a golden crown and a long white tunic. No sooner had
Glauce put them on, than unquenchable flame appeared and consumed not only her—
although she plunged headlong to palace fountain—but King Creon, a crowd of other
distinguished Theban guests, and everyone else assembled in the palace except of Jason; who
escaped by leaping from an upper window.
d. At this point Zeus, greatly admiring Medea’s spirit, fell in love with her, but she
repulsed all his advances. Hera was grateful, and she told her: “I will make your children
immortal,’ said she, ‘if you lay them on sacrificial altar in my temple.’ Medea did so; and then
fled in drawn by winged serpents, a loan from her grandfather Helius, bequeathing the
kingdom to Sisyphus.
e. The name of only one of Medea’s daughters by Jason is remembered: Eriopis. Her
eldest son, Medeius, or Polyxenus, who was educated by Cheiron on Mount Pelion,
afterwards ruled the Media; but Medeius’s father is sometimes called Aegeus. Other sons
were Mermerus, Pheres, or Thessalus, Alcimedes, Tisander and Argus; all of whom the
Corinthians, enraged by the murder of Glauce and Creon, seized and stoned to death. For this
crime they since made expiation: seven girls and seven boys, wearing white garments and
with their heads shaven, spend a whole year in the temple of Hera on the Heights, where the
murder was committed. By order of the Delphic Oracle, the dead children’s corpses were
buried; their souls, however, became immortal, as Hera had promised. There are those who charge Jason with condoning this murder, but explain that he was vexed beyond endurance by
Medea’s ambition on behalf of his children.
f. Others again, misled by the dramatist Euripides, whom the Corinthians bribed with fifteen
talents of silver to absolve them of guilt, pretend that Medea killed two of her own children;
and that the remainder perished in the palace which she had set on fire—except Thessalus,
who escaped and later reigned over Iolcus, giving his name to all Thessaly; and Pheres, whose
son Mermerus inherited Medea’s skill as a poisoner.


MEDEA IN EXILE

MEDEA fled first to Heracles at Thebes, where he had promised to shelter her should
Jason ever prove unfaithful, and cured him of the madness that had made him kill his children;
nevertheless, the Thebans would not permit her to take up residence among them because
Creon, whom she had murdered, was their King. So she went to Athens, and King Aegeus
was glad to marry her. Next, banished from Athens for her attempted poisoning of Theseus,
she sailed to Italy and taught the Marrubians the art of snake-charming; they still worship her
as the goddess Angitia. After a brief visit to Thessaly, where she unsuccessfully competed
with Thetis in a beauty contest judged by Idomeneus the Cretan, she married an Asian king
whose name has not survived but who is said to have been Medeius’s true father.
b. Hearing, finally, that Aeëtes’s Colchian throne had been usurped by her uncle
Perses, Medea went to Colchis with Medeius, who killed Perses, set Aeëtes on his throne
again, and enlarged the kingdom of Colchis to include Media. Some pretend that she was by that time reconciled to Jason, and took him with her to Colchis; but the history of Medea has,
of course, been embellished and distorted by the extravagant fancies of many tragic dramatists.
The truth is that Jason, having forfeited the favour of the gods, whose names he had taken in
vain when he broke faith with Medea, wandered homeless from city to city, hated of men. In
old age he came once more to Corinth, and sat down in the shadow of the Argo, remembering
his past glories, and grieving for the disasters that had overwhelmed him. He was about to
hang himself from the prow, when it suddenly toppled forward and killed him. Poseidon then
placed the image of the Argo’s stem, which was innocent of homicide, among the stars.
c. Medea never died, but became an immortal and reigned in the Elysian Fields where
some say that she, rather than Helen, married Achilles.
d. As for Athamas, whose failure to sacrifice Phrixus had been the cause of the
Argonauts’ expedition, he was on the point of being himself sacrificed at Orchomenus, as the
sin-offering demanded by the Oracle of Laphystian Zeus, when his grandson Cytisorus
returned from Aeaca and rescued him. This vexed Zeus, who decreed that, henceforth, the
eldest son of the Athamantids must avoid the Council Hall in perpetuity, on pain of death; a
decree which has been observed ever since.
e. The homecomings of the Argonauts yield many tales; but that of Great Ancaeus, the
helmsman, is the most instructive. Having survived so many hardships and perils, he returned
to his palace at Tegea, where a seer had once warned him that he would never taste the wine
of a vineyard which he had planted some years previously. On the day of his arrival, Ancaeus
was informed that his steward had harvested the first grapes, and that the wine awaited him.
He therefore filled a winecup, set it to his lips and, calling the seer, reproached him for
prophesying falsely. The seer answered: ‘Sire, there is many a slip ‘twixt the cup and the lip!’,
and at that instant Ancaeus’s servants ran up, shouting: ‘My lord, a wild boar! It is ravaging
your vineyard!’ He set down the untasted cup, grasped his boar-spear, and hurried out; but the
boar lay concealed behind a bush and, charging, killed him.


THE FOUNDATION OF TROY

ONE story told about the foundation of Troy is that, in time of famine, a third of the
Cretan people, commanded by Prince Scamander, set out to found a colony. On reaching
Phrygia, they pitched their camp beside the sea, not far from the city of Hamaxitus, below a
high mountain which they named Ida in honour of Zeus’s Cretan home. Now, Apollo had
advised them to settle wherever they should be attacked by earth-born enemies under cover of
darkness; and that same night a horde of famished field mice invaded the tents and nibbled at
bow-strings, leather shield-straps, and all other edible parts of the Cretans’ war-gear.
Scamander accordingly called a halt, dedicated a temple to Sminthian Apollo (around which
the city of Sminthium soon grew) and married the nymph Idaea, who bore him a son, Teucer.
With Apollo’s help, the Cretans defeated their new neighbours, the Bebrycians, but in the
course of the fighting Scamander had leaped into the river Xanthus, which thereupon took his
name. Teucer, after whom the settlers were called Teucrians, succeeded him. Yet some say
that Teucer himself led the Cretan immigrants, and was welcomed to Phrygia by Dardanus,
who gave him his daughter in marriage and called his own subjects Teucrians.
b. The Athenians tell a wholly different story. They deny that the Teucrians came from
Crete, and record that a certain Teucer, belonging to the deme of Troes, emigrated from
Athens to Phrygia; and that Dardanus, Zeus’s son by the Pleiad Electra, and a native of
Arcadian Pheneus, was welcomed to Phrygia by this Teucer, not contrariwise. In support of
this tradition it is urged that Erichthonius appears in the genealogy both of the Athenian and
the Teucrian royal houses. Dardanus, the Athenians go on to say, married Chryse, the
daughter of Pallas, who bore him two sons, Idaeus and Deimas. These reigned for a while
over the Arcadian kingdom founded by Atlas, but were parted by the calamities of the
Deucalionian Flood. Deimas remained in Arcadia, but Idaeus went with his father Dardanus
to Samothrace, which they colonized together, the island being thereafter called Dardania.
Chryse had brought Dardanus as her dowry the sacred images of the Great Deities whose
priestess she was, and he now introduced their cult into Samothrace, though keeping their true
names a secret. Dardanus also founded a college of Salian priests to perform the necessary
rites; which were the same as those performed by the Cretan Curetes.
c. Grief at the death of his brother Iasion drove Dardanus across sea to the Troad. He
arrived alone, paddling a raft made of an inflated skin which he had ballasted with four stones.
Teucer received him hospitably and, on condition that he helped to subdue certain
neighbouring tribes, gave him a share of the kingdom and married him to the princess Bateia.
Some say that this Bateia was Teucer’s aunt; others, that she was his daughter.
d. Dardanus proposed to found a city on the small hill of Ate, which rises from the
plain where Troy, or Ilium, now stands; but when an oracle of Phrygian Apollo warned him
that misfortune would always attend its inhabitants, he chose a site on the lower slopes of
Mount Ida, and named his city Dardania. After Teucer’s death, Dardanus succeeded to the
remainder of the kingdom, giving it his own name, and extended his rule over many Asiatic
nations; he also sent out colonists to Thrace and beyond.
e. Meanwhile, Dardanus’s youngest son Idaeus had followed him the Troad, bringing
the sacred images; which enabled Dardanus to teach his people the Samothracian Mysteries. An oracle then assured him that the city which he was about to found would remain invincible
only so long as his wife’s dowry continued under Athene s protection. His tomb is still shown
in that part of Troy which was called Dardania before it merged with the villages of Ileum and
Taros into a single city. Ideas settled on the Idea Mountains which, some say, are called after
him; and there instituted the worship and Mysteries of the Phrygian Mother of the Gods.
f. According to the Latin tradition, Iasion’s father was the Tyrrhenian prince Corythus;
and his twin, Dardanus, the son of Zeus by Corythus’s wife Electra. Both emigrated from
Etruria, after dividing these sacred images between them: Iasion went to Samothrace, and
Dardanus to the Troad. While battling with the Bebrycians, who tried to throw the
Tyrrhenians back into the sea, Dardanus lost his helmet and, although his troops were in
retreat, led them back to recover it. This time he was victorious, and founded a city named
Corythus on the battle-field in memory of his helmet (corys), as of his father.
g. Idaeus had two elder brothers, Erichthonius and Ilus, or Zacynthius and a daughter,
Idaea, who became Phineus’s second wife. When Erichthonius succeeded to the kingdom of
Dardanus, he married Astyoche, the daughter of Simoeis, who bore him Tros. Erichthonius,
described also as a king of Crete, was the most prosperous of men, in possession of the three
thousand mares with which Boreas fell in love. Tros succeeded his father Erichthonius, and
not only Troy but the whole Troad took his name. By his wife Callirrhoë, a daughter of
Scamander, he became the father of Cleopatra the Younger, Ilus the Younger, Asaracus, and
Ganymedes.
i. Meanwhile, Ilus, the brother of Erichthonius had gone to Phrygia, entering for the
games which he found in progress, he was victorious in the wrestling match and won fifty
youths and fifty maidens as his prize. The Phrygian king (whose name is now forgotten) also
gave him a dappled cow, and advised him to found a city wherever she first lie down. Ilus
followed her; she lay down on reaching the hill of Ate; and there he built the city of Ilium
though, because of the warbling oracle delivered to his father Dardanus, he raised no
fortifications. Some, however, say that it was one of Ilus’s own Mysian cows which he
followed, and that his instructions came from Apollo. But others hold that Ilium was founded
by Locrian immigrants, and that they gave the name of their mountain Phriconis to the Trojan
mountain of Cyme.
i. When the circuit of the city boundaries had been marked out, Ilus prayed to
Almighty Zeus for a sign, and next morning noticed a wooden object lying in front of his tent,
half buried in the earth, and overgrown with weeds. This was the Palladium, a legless image
three cubits high, made by Athene in memory of her dead Libyan playmate Pallas. Pallas,
whose name Athene added to her own, held a spear aloft in the right hand, and a distaff and
spindle in the left; around her breast was wrapped the aegis. Athene had first set up the image
on Olympus, beside Zeus’s throne, where it received great honour; but, when Ilus’s great-
grandmother, the Pleiad Electra, was violated by Zeus and defiled it with her touch, Athene
angrily cast her, with the image, down to earth.
j. Apollo Smintheus now advised Ilus: ‘Preserve the Goddess who fell from the skies,
and you will preserve your city: for wherever she goes, she carries empire!’ Accordingly he
raised a temple on the citadel to house the image.
k. Some say that the temple was already rising when the image descended from
heaven as the goddess’s gift. It dropped through a dart of the roof which had not yet been
completed, and was found standing exactly in its proper place. Others say that Electra gave
the Palladium to Dardanus, her son by Zeus, and that it was carded from Dardania to Ilium
after his death. Others, again, say that it fell from heaven at Athens, and that the Athenian
Teucer brought it to the Troad. Still others believe that there were two Palladia, an Athenian
and a Trojan, the latter carved from the bones of Pelops, just as the image of Zeus at Olympia
was carved from Indian ivory; or, that there were numerous Palladia, all similarly cast from heaven, including the Samothracian images brought to the Troad by Idaeus. The College of
Vestals at Rome now guard what is reputed to be the genuine Palladium. No man may look at
it with impunity. Once, while it was still in Trojan hands, Ilus rushed to its rescue at an alarm
of fire, and was blinded his pains; later, however, he contrived to placate Athene and regained
his sight.
l. Eurydice, daughter of Adrastus, bore to Ilus Laomedon, Themiste who married the
Phrygian Capys and, some say, the mother of Anchises. By Strymo, a daughter of Scamander
and Leucippe, or Zeuxippe, or Thoösa, Laomedon had five sons: Tithonus, Lampus, Clytius,
Hicetaon, and Podarces; as well as the daughters: Hesione, Cilla, and Astyoche. He also begot
bastard twins on the nymph-shepherdess Calybe. It was he who decided to build famous walls
of Troy and was lucky enough to secure the services gods Apollo and Poseidon, then under
Zeus’s displeasure for a riot they made against him and forced to serve as day-labourers.
Poseidon did the building, while Apollo played the lyre and fed Laomedon’s flocks; and
Aeacus the Lelegian lent Poseidon a hand. But Laomedon cheated the gods of their pay and
earned their bitter resentment. It was the reason why he and all his sons—except Podarces,
now renamed Priam—perished in Heracles’s sack of Troy.
m. Priam, to whom Heracles generously awarded the Trojan throne, surmised that the
calamity which had befallen Troy was due to its luckless site, rather than to the anger of the
gods. He therefore sent once his nephews to ask the Pythoness at Delphi whether a curse still
lay on the hill of Ate. But the priest of Apollo, Panthous the son of Othrias, was so beautiful
that Priam’s nephew, forgetting his commission, fell in love with him and carried him back to
Troy. Though vexed, Priam had not the heart to punish his nephew. In compensation for the
injury done he appointed Panthous priest of Apollo and, ashamed to consult the Pythoness
again, rebuilt Troy on the same foundations. Priam’s first wife was Arisbe, a daughter of
Merops, the seer. When she had borne him Aesacus, he married her to Hyrtacus, by whom she
became the mother of the Hyrtacides: Asius and Nisus.
n. This Aesacus, who learned the art of interpreting dreams from his grandfather
Merops, is famous for the great love he showed Asterope, a daughter of the river Cebren:
when she died, he tried repeatedly to kill himself by leaping from a sea-cliff until, at last, the
gods took pity on his plight. They turned Aesacus into a diving bird, thus allowing him to
indulge his obsession with greater decency.
o. Hecabe, Priam’s second wife—whom the Latins call Hecuba — was a daughter of
Dymas and the nymph Eunoë; or, some say, of Cisseus and Telecleia; or of the river
Sangarius and Metope; or of Glaucippe, the daughter of Xanthus. She bore Priam nineteen of
his fifty sons, the remainder being the children of concubines; all fifty occupied adjacent bed-
chambers of polished stone. Priam’s twelve daughters slept with their husbands on the farther
side of the same courtyard. Hecabe’s eldest son was Hector, whom some call the son of
Apollo; next, she bore Paris; then Creusa, Laodice, and Polyxena; then Deiphobus, Helenus,
Cassandra, Pammon, Polites, Antiphus, Hipponous, and Polydorus. But Troilus was certainly
begotten on her by Apollo.
p. Among Hecabe’s younger children were the twins Cassandra and Helenus. At their
birthday feast, celebrated in the sanctuary of Thymbraean Apollo, they grew tired of play and
fell asleep in a corner, while their forgetrial parents, who had drunk too much wine, staggered
home without them. When Hecabe returned to the temple, she found the sacred serpents
licking the children’s ears, and screamed for terror. The serpents at once disappeared into a
pile of laurel boughs, but from that hour both Cassandra and Helenus possessed the gift of
prophecy.
q. Another account of the matter is that one day Cassandra fell asleep in the temple,
Apollo appeared and promised to teach her the art of prophecy if she would lie with him.
Cassandra, after accepting his gift, went back on the bargain; but Apollo begged her to give him one kiss and, as she did so, spat into her mouth, thus ensuring that none would ever
believe what she prophesied.
r. When, after several years of prudent government, Priam had restored Troy to its former
wealth and power, he summoned a Council to discuss the case of his sister Hesione, whom
Telamon the Acacid had taken away to Greece. Though he himself was in favour of force, the
Council recommended that persuasion should first be tried. His brother-in-law Anterior and
his cousin Anchises therefore went to Greece and delivered the Trojan demands to the
assembled Greeks at Telamon’s court; but were scornfully sent about their business. The
incident was a main cause of the Trojan War, the gloomy end of which Cassandra was now
already predicting. To avoid scandal, Priam locked her up in a pyramidal building on the
citadel; the guardians cared for her had orders to keep him informed of all her prophesised
utterances.


PARIS AND HELEN

WHEN Helen, Leda’s beautiful daughter, grew to womanhood at Sparta in the palace
of her foster-father Tyndareus, all the princes of Greece came with rich gifts as her suitors, or
sent their kinsmen to represent them. Diomedes, fresh from his victory at Thebes, was there
with Ajax, Teucer, Philoctetes, Idomeneus, Patroclus, Menestheus, and many others.
Odysseus came too, but empty-handed, because he had not the least chance of success—for,
even though the Dioscuri, Helen’s brothers, wanted her to marry Menestheus of Athens, she
would, Odysseus knew, be given to Prince Menelaus, the richest of the Achaeans, represented
by Tyndareus’s powerful son-in-law Agamemnon.
b. Tyndareus sent no suitor away, but would, on the other hand, accept none of the
proffered gifts; fearing that his partiality for any one prince might set the others quarrelling.
Odysseus asked him one day:
‘If I tell you how to avoid a quarrel will you, in return, help me to marry Icarius’s
daughter Penelope?’
‘It is a bargain,’ cried Tyndareus.
‘Then,’ continued Odysseus, ‘my advice to you is: insist that all Helen’s suitors swear
to defend her chosen husband against whoever resents his good fortune.’
Tyndareus agreed that this was a prudent course. After sacrificing a horse, and jointing it, he
made the suitors stand on its bloody pieces, and repeat the oath which Odysseus had
formulated; the joints were then buried at a place still called ‘The Horse’s Tomb’.
c. It is not known whether Tyndareus himself chose Helen’s husband, or whether she
declared her own preference by crowning him with a wreath. At all events, she married
Menelaus, who became King of Sparta after the death of Tyndareus and the deification of the
Dioscuri. Yet their marriage was doomed to failure: years before, while sacrificing to the gods,
Tyndareus had stupidly overlooked Aphrodite, who took her revenge by swearing to make all
three of his daughters — Clytaemnestra, Timandra, and Helen — notorious for their
adulteries.
d. Menelaus had one daughter by Helen, whom she named Hermione; their sons were
Aethiolas, Maraphius—from whom the Persian family of the Maraphions claim descent—and
Pleisthenes. An Aetolian slave-girl named Pieris later bore Menelaus twin bastards:
Nicostratus and Megapenthes.
e. Why, it is asked, had Zeus and Themis planned the Trojan War? Was it to make
Helen famous for having embroiled Europe and Asia? Or to exalt the race of the demi-gods,
and at the same time to thin out the populous tribes that were oppressing the surface of
Mother Earth? Their reason must remain obscure, but the decision had already been taken
when Eris threw down a golden apple inscribed ‘For the Fairest’ at the wedding of Peleus and
Thetis. Almighty Zeus refused to decide the ensuing dispute between Hera, Athene, and
Aphrodite, and let Hermes lead the goddesses to Mount Ida, where Priam’s lost son Paris
would act as arbiter.
f. Now, just before the birth of Paris, Hecabe had dreamed that she brought forth a
faggot from which wriggled countless fiery serpents. She awoke screaming that the city of
Troy and the forests of Mount Ida were ablaze. Priam at once consulted his son Aesacus, the
seer, who announced: ‘The child about to be born will be the ruin of our country! I beg you to
do away with him.’
g. A few days later, Aesacus made a further announcement: ‘The royal Trojan who
brings forth a child today must be destroyed, and so must her offspring!’ Priam thereupon
killed his sister Cilla, and her infant son Munippus, born that morning from a secret union
with Thymoetes, and buried them in the sacred precinct of Tros. But Hecabe was delivered of
a son before nightfall, and Priam spared both their lives, although Herophile, priestess of
Apollo, and other seers, urged Hecabe at least to kill the child. She could not bring herself to do so; and in the end Priam was prevailed upon to send for his chief herdsman, one Agelaus,
and entrust him with the task. Agelaus, being too soft-hearted to use a rope or a sword,
exposed the infant on Mount Ida, where he was suckled by a she-bear. Returning after five
days, Agelaus was amazed at the portent, and brought the waif home in a wallet hence the
name ‘Paris’—to rear with his own new-born son; and took a dog’s tongue to Priam as
evidence that his command had been obeyed. But some say that Hecabe bribed Agelaus to
spare Paris and keep the secret from Priam.
h. Paris’s noble birth was soon disclosed by his outstanding behaviour, intelligence,
and strength: when little more than a child, he routed band of cattle-thieves and recovered the
cows they had stolen, thus winning the surname Alexander. Though ranking no higher than a
slave at this time, Paris became the chosen lover of Oenone, daughter of the river Oeneus, a
fountain-nymph. She had been taught the art of prophecy by Rhea, and that of medicine by
Apollo while he was serving as Laomedon’s herdsman. Paris and Oenone used to herd their
cattle and hunt together; he carved her name in the bark of beech-trees and poplars. His chief
amusement was setting Agelaus’s bulls to fight one another; he would crown the victor with
flowers, and the loser with straw. When one bull began to win consistently, Paris pitted it
against the champions of his neighbours’ herds, all of which were defeated. At last he offered
to set a golden crown upon the horns of any bull that could overcome his own; so, for a jest,
Ares turned himself into a bull, and won the prize. Paris’s unhesitating award of this crown to
Ares surprised and pleased the gods as they watched from Olympus; which is why Zeus chose
him to arbitrate between the three goddesses.
i. He was herding his cattle on Mount Gargarus, the highest peak of Ida, when Hermes,
accompanied by Hera, Athene, and Aphrodite, delivered the golden apple and Zeus’s message:
‘Paris, since you are as handsome as you are wise in affairs of the heart, Zeus
commands you to judge which of these goddesses is the fairest.’
Paris accepted the apple doubtfully.
‘How can a simple cattle-man like myself become an arbiter of divine beauty?’ he
cried. ‘I shall divide this apple between all three.’
‘No, no, you cannot disobey Almighty Zeus!’ Hermes replied hurriedly. ‘Nor am I
authorized to give you advice. Use your native intelligence!’
‘So be it,’ sighed Paris. ‘But first I beg the losers not to be vexed with me. I am only a
human being, liable to make the stupidest mistakes.’ The goddesses all agreed to abide by his
decision.
‘Will it be enough to judge them as they are?’ Paris asked Hermes, ‘or should they be
naked?’
‘The rules of the contest are for you to decide,’ Hermes answered with a discreet smile.
‘In that case, will they kindly disrobe?’
Hermes told the goddesses to do so, and politely turned his back.
j. Aphrodite was soon ready, but Athene insisted that she should remove the famous
magic girdle, which gave her an unfair advantage by making everyone fall in love with the
wearer.
‘Very well,’ said Aphrodite spitefully. ‘I will, on condition that you remove your
helmet —you look hideous without it.’
‘Now, if you please, I must judge you one at a time,’ announced Paris, ‘to avoid
distractive arguments. Come here, Divine Hera! Will you other two goddesses be good
enough to leave us for awhile?’
‘Examine me conscientiously,’ said Hera, turning slowly around, and displaying her
magnificent figure, ‘and remember that if you judge me the fairest, I will make you lord of all
Asia, and the richest man alive.’
‘I am not to be bribed, my Lady ... Very well, thank you. Now I have seen all that I
need to see. Come, Divine Athene!’
k. ‘Here I am,’ said Athene, striding purposefully forward. ‘Listen, Paris, if you have
enough common sense to award me the prize, I will make you victorious in all your battles, as
well as the handsomest and wisest man in the world.’
‘I am a humble herdsman, not a soldier,’ said Paris. ‘You can see for yourself that
peace reigns throughout Lydia and Phrygia, and that King Priam’s sovereignty is uncontested.
But I promise to consider fairly your claim to the apple. Now you are at liberty to put on your
clothes and helmet again. Is Aphrodite ready?’
l. Aphrodite sidled up to him, and Paris blushed because she came so close that they
were almost touching.
‘Look carefully, please, pass nothing over .... By the way, as soon as I saw you, I said
to myself: “Upon my word, there goes the handsomest young man in Phrygia! Why does he
waste himself here in the wilderness herding stupid cattle?” Well, why do you, Paris? Why
not move into a city and lead a civilized life? What have you to lose by marrying someone
like Helen of Sparta, who is as beautiful as I am, and no less passionate? I am convinced that,
once you two have met, she would abandon her home, her family, everything, to become your
mistress. Surely you have heard of Helen?’
‘Never until now, my Lady. I should be most grateful if you describe her.’
m. ‘Helen is of fair and delicate complexion, having been born from a swan’s egg. She
can claim Zeus for a father, loves hunting and wrestling, caused one war while she was still a
child—and, when she came of age, all the princes of Greece were her suitors. At present she
is married to Menelaus, brother of the High King Agamemnon; but that makes no odds—you
can have her if you like.’
‘How is that possible, if she is already married?’
‘Heavens! How innocent you are! Have you never heard that it is my divine duty to
arrange affairs of this sort? I suggest now that you tour Greece with my son Eros as your
guide. Once you reach Sparta, he and I will see that Helen falls head over heels in love with
you.’
‘Would you swear to that?’ Paris asked excitedly.
Aphrodite uttered a solemn oath, and Paris, without a second thought, awarded her the golden
apple. By this judgement he incurred the smothered hatred of both Hera and Athene, who
went off arm-in-arm to plot the destruction of Troy; while Aphrodite, with a naughty smile,
stood wondering how best to keep her promise.
n. Soon afterwards, Priam sent his servants to fetch a bull from Agelaus’s herd. It was
to be a prize at the funeral games now annually celebrated in honour of his dead son. When
the servants chose the champion bull, Paris was seized by a sudden desire to attend the games,
and ran after them. Agelaus tried to restrain him: ‘You have your own private bull fights,
what more do you want?’ But Paris persisted and, in the end, Agelaus accompanied him to
Troy.
o. It was a Trojan custom that, at the close of the sixth lap of the chariot race, those
who had entered for the boxing match should begin fighting in front of the throne. Paris
decided to compete and, despite Agelaus’s entreaties, sprang into the arena and won the
crown, by sheer courage rather than by skill. He also came home first in the footrace, which
so exasperated Priam’s sons that they challenged him to another; thus he won his third crown.
Ashamed at this public defeat, they decided to kill him and set an armed guard at every exit of
the stadium, while Hector and Deiphobus attacked him with their swords. Paris leaped for the
protection of Zeus’s altar, and Agelaus ran towards Priam, crying: ‘Your Majesty, this youth
is your long-lost son!’ Priam at once summoned Hecabe who, when Agelaus displayed a rattle
which had been found in Paris’s hands, confirmed his identity. He was taken triumphantly to the palace, where Priam celebrated his return with a huge banquet and sacrifices to the gods.
Yet, as soon as the priests of Apollo heard the news, they announced that Paris must be put to
death immediately, else Troy would perish. This was reported to Priam, who answered:
‘Better that Troy should fall, than that my wonderful son should die!’
p. Paris’s married brothers presently urged him to take a wife; but he told them that he
trusted Aphrodite to choose one for him, and used to offer her prayers every day. When
another Council was called to discuss the rescue of Hesione, peaceful overtures having failed,
Paris volunteered to lead the expedition, if Priam would provide him with a large, well-
manned fleet. He cunningly added that, should he fail to bring Hesione back, he might
perhaps carry off a Greek princess of equal rank to hold in ransom for her. His heart was, of
course, secretly set on going to Sparta to fetch back Helen.
q. That very day, Menelaus arrived unexpectedly at Troy and enquired for the tombs
of Lycus and Chimaerus, Prometheus’s sons by Celaeno the Atlantid: he explained that the
remedy which the Delphic Oracle had prescribed him for a plague now ravaging Sparta was
to offer them heroic sacrifices. Paris entertained Menelaus and begged, as a favour, to be
purified by him at Sparta, since he had accidentally killed Antenor’s young son Antheus with
a toy sword. When Menelaus agreed, Paris, on Aphrodite’s advice, commissioned Phereclus,
the son of Tecton, to build the fleet which Priam had promised him; the figurehead of his flag-
ship was to be an Aphrodite holding a miniature Eros. Paris’s cousin Aeneas, Anchises’s son,
agreed to accompany him. Cassandra, her hair streaming loose, foretold the conflagration that
the voyage would cause, and Helenus concurred; but Priam took no notice of either of his
prophetic children. Even Oenone failed to dissuade Paris from the fatal journey, although he
wept when kissing her good-bye. ‘Come back to me if ever you are wounded,’ she said,
‘because I alone can heal you.’
r. The fleet put out to sea, Aphrodite sent a favouring breeze, and Paris soon reached
Sparta, where Menelaus feasted him for nine days. At the banquet, Paris presented Helen with
the gifts that he had brought from Troy; and his shameless glances, loud sighs and bold
signals caused her considerable embarrassment. Picking up her goblet he would set his lips to
that part of the rim from which she had drunk; and once she found the words ‘I love you,
Helen!’ traced in wine on the table top. She grew terrified that Menelaus might suspect her of
encouraging Paris’s passion; but, being an unobservant man, he cheerfully sailed off to Crete,
where he had to attend the obsequies of his grandfather Catreus, leaving her to entertain the
guests and rule the kingdom during his absence?
s. Helen eloped with Paris that very night, and gave herself to him in love at the first
port of call, which was the island of Cranaë. On the mainland, opposite Cranaë, stands a
shrine of Aphrodite the Uniter, founded by Paris to celebrate this occasion. Some record
untruthfully that Helen rejected his advances, and that he carried her off by force while she
was out hunting; or by a sudden raid on the city of Sparta; or by disguising himself, with
Aphrodite’s aid, as Menelaus. She abandoned her daughter Hermione, then nine years of age,
but took away her son Pleisthenes, the greater part of the palace treasures, and gold to the
value of three talents stolen from Apollo’s temple; as well as five serving women, among
whom were the two former queens, Aethra the mother of Theseus, and Theisadie, Peirithotis’s
sister.
t. As they steered towards Troy, a great storm sent by Hera forced Paris to touch at
Cyprus. Thence he sailed to Sidon, and was entertained by the king whom, being now
instructed in the ways of the Greek world, he treacherously murdered and robbed in his own
banqueting hall. While the rich booty was being embarked, a company of Sidonians attacked
him; these he beat off, after a bloody fight and the loss of two ships, and came safely away.
Fearing pursuit by Menelaus, Paris delayed for several months in Phoenicia, Cyprus, and
Egypt; but, reaching Troy at last, he celebrated his wedding with Helen. The Trojans welcomed her, entranced by such divine beauty; and one day, finding a stone on the Trojan
citadel, which dripped blood when rubbed against another, she recognized this as a powerful
aphrodisiac and used it to keep Paris’s passion ablaze. What was more, all Troy, not Paris
only, fell in love with her; and Priam took an oath never to let her go.
u. An altogether different account of the matter is that Hermes stole Helen at Zeus’s
command, and entrusted her to King Proteus of Egypt; meanwhile, a phantom Helen,
fashioned from clouds by Hera (or, some say, by Proteus) was sent to Troy at Paris’s side:
with the sole purpose of provoking strife.
v. Egyptian priests record, no less improbably, that the Trojan fleet blown of its course,
and that Paris landed at Salinas in the Canopic mouth of the Nile. There stands Heracles’s
temple, a sanctuary for runaway slaves who, on arrival, dedicate themselves to the god and
receive certain sacred marks on their bodies. Paris’s servants fled here and, after securing the
priests’ protection, accused him of having abducted Helen. The Canopic warden took
cognizance of the matter and reported it to King Proteus at Memphis, who had Paris arrested
and brought before him, together with Helen and the stolen treasure. After a close
interrogation, Proteus banished Paris but detained Helen and the treasure in Egypt, until
Menelaus should come to recover them. In Memphis stands a temple of Aphrodite the
Stranger, said to have been dedicated by Helen herself.
w. Helen bore Paris three sons, Bunomus, Aganus, and Idaeus, all of them killed at Troy
while still infants by the collapse of a roof; and one daughter, also called Helen. Paris had an
elder son by Oenone, named Corythus, whom, in jealousy of Helen, she sent to guide the
avenging Greeks to Troy.


NINE YEARS OF WAR

AT what point the Greeks sent Priam envoys to demand the return of Helen and of
Menelaus’s property, is disputed. Some say, soon after the expedition had landed in the Troad;
others, before the ships assembled at Aulis; but it is commonly held that the embassy,
consisting of Menelaus, Odysseus, and Palamedes, went ahead from Tenedos. The Trojans,
however, being determined to keep Helen, would have murdered them all had not Antenor, in
whose house they were lodging, forbidden the shameful deed.
b. Vexed by this obduracy, the Greeks sailed from Tenedos and beached their ships
within sight of Troy. The Trojans at once flocked down to the sea and tried to repel the
invaders with showers of stones. Then, while all the others hesitated—even Achilles, whom
Thetis had warned that the first to land would be the first to die—Protesilaus leaped ashore,
killed a number of Trojans, and was struck dead by Hector; or it may have been Euphorbus;
or Aeneas’s friend Achates.
c. This Protesilaus, an uncle of Philoctetes, and son of that Iphiclus whom Melampus
cured of impotence, had been called Iolaus, but was renamed from the circumstance of his
death. He lies buried in the Thracian Chersonese, near the city of Elaeus, where he is now
given divine honours. Tall elm-trees, planted by nymphs, stand within. his precinct and
overshadow the tomb. The boughs which face Troy across the sea burst early into leaf, but
presently go bare; while those on the other side are still green in winter-time. When the elms
grow so high that the walls of Troy can be clearly discerned by a man posted in their upper
branches, they wither; saplings, however, spring again from the roots.
d. Protesilaus’s wife Laodameia, daughter of Acastus (whom some call Polydora
daughter of Meleager) missed him so sadly that as soon as he sailed for Troy she made a
brazen, or wax, statue of him and laid it in her bed. But this was poor comfort, and when news
came of his death, she begged the gods to take pity and let him revisit her, if only for three
hours. Almighty Zeus granted Laodameia’s request, and Hermes brought up Protesilaus’s
ghost from Tartarus to animate the statue. Speaking with its mouth, Protesilaus then adjured
her not to delay in following him, and the three hours had no sooner ended than she stabbed
herself to death in his embrace. Others say that Laodameia’s father Acastus forced her to
remarry, but that she spent her nights with Protesilaus’s statue until one day a servant,
bringing apples for a day sacrifice, looked through a crack in the bedroom-door and saw her
embracing what he took to be a lover. He ran and told Acastus who bursting into the room,
discovered the truth. Rather than letting her torture herself by fruitless longing, Acastus
ordered the statue to be burned; but Laodameia threw herself into the flames and perished
with it.
e. According to another tradition, Protesilaus survived the Trojan War and set sail for
home. He took back, as his prisoner, Priam’s sister Aethylla. On the way he landed at the
Macedonian peninsula of Pellene but, while he went ashore in search of water, Aethylla
persuaded the other captive women’ to burn the ships; and Protesilaus, thus obliged to remain
on Pellene, founded the city of Scione. This, however, is an error: Aethylla, with Astyoche
and her fellow-captives, set fire to the vessels beside the Italian river Navaethus, which means
‘burning of ships’; and Protesilaus did not figure among their captors.
f. Achilles was the second Greek to land on the Trojan shore, closely followed by his
Myrmidons, and killed Cycnus son of Poseidon with a well-flung stone. Thereupon the
Trojans broke and fled back to their city, while the remainder of the Greeks disembarked and
pressed murderously on the rout. According to another account, Achilles, mindful of
Protesilaus’s rite, was the very last to land, and then took such a prodigious leap from his ship
that a spring gushed out where his feet struck the shore. In the ensuing battle, it is said,
Cycnus, who was invulnerable, killed Greeks by the hundred; but Achilles, after trying sword
and spear against him in vain, battered furiously at his face with the hilt of his sword, forced
him backwards until he tripped over a stone, then knelt on his breast and strangled him with
the straps of his helmet; however, Poseidon turned his spirit into a swan, which flew away.
The Greeks then laid siege to Troy and drew up their strips behind a stockade.
g. Now, the city was fated not to fall if Troilus could attain the age of twenty. Some
say that Achilles fell in love with him as they fought together, and ‘I will kill you,’ he said,
‘unless you yield to my caresses!’ Troilus fled and took refuge in the sanctuary in the temple
of Thymbraean Apollo; but Achilles cared nothing for the god’s wrath and since Troilus remained coy, beheaded him at the altar, the very place where he himself later perished.
Others say that Achilles speared Troilus while he was exercising his horses in the temple
precinct; or that he lured him out by offering a gift of doves, and that Troilus died with
crushed ribs and livid face, in such bear-like fashion did Achilles make love. Others, again,
say that Troilus sallied vengefully from Troy after the death of Memnon and encountered
Achilles, who killed him—or else he was taken prisoner and then publicly slaughtered in cold
blood at Achilles’s orders—and that, being then middle-aged, with a swarthy complexion and
a flowing beard, he can hardly have excited Achilles’s passion. But whatever the manner of
his death, Achilles caused it, and the Trojans mourned for him as grievously as for Hector.
h. Troilus is said to have loved Briseis, Calchas’s beautiful daughter, who had been
left behind in Troy by her father and, since she had played no part in his defection, continued
to be treated there with courtesy. Calchas, knowing that Troy must fall, persuaded
Agamemnon to ask Priam for her on his behalf, lest she should be made a prisoner of war.
Priam generously gave his assent and several of his sons escorted Briseis to the Greek camp.
Although she had sworn undying fidelity to Troilus, Briseis soon transferred her affections to
Diomedes the Argive, who fell passionately in love with her and did his best to kill Troilus
whenever he appeared on the battle-field.
i. On a night expedition, Achilles captured Lycaon, surprising him in his father
Priam’s orchard, where he was cutting fig-tree shoots for use as chariot-rails. Patroclus took
Lycaon to Lemnos, and sold him to Jason’s son, King Euneus, who supplied the Greek forces
with wine; the price being a silver Phoenidan mixing-bowl. But Eëtion of Imbros ransomed
him, and he returned to Troy, only to perish at the hand of Achilles twelve days later.
j. Achilles now set out with a band of volunteers to ravage the Trojan countryside. On
Mount Ida he cut off Aeneas the Dardanian from his cattle, chased him down the wooded
slopes and, after killing the cattlemen and Priam’s son Mestor, captured the herd and sacked
the city of Lyrnessus, where Aeneas had taken refuge. Mynes and Epistrophus, sons of King
Evenus, died in the fighting; but Zeus helped Aeneas to escape. Mynes’s wife, another Briseis,
daughter of Briseus, was made captive, and her father hanged himself.
k. Though Aeneas had connived at Paris’s abduction of Helen, he remained neutral for
the first few years of the war; being born of the goddess Aphrodite by Anchises, the grandson
of Tros, he resented the disdain shown him by his cousin Priam. Yet Achilles’s provocative
raid obliged the Dardanians to join forces with the Trojans. Aeneas proved a skilled fighter
and even Achilles did not dispatch him: for if Hector was the hand of the Trojans, Aeneas was
their soul. His divine mother frequently helped him in battle; and once, when Diomedes had
broken his hip with the cast of a stone, rescued him from death; and when Diomedes had
wounded her too, with a spear-thrust in the wrist, Apollo carried Aeneas off the field for Leto
and Artemis to cure. On another occasion his life was saved by Poseidon who, though hostile
to the Trojans, respected the decrees of fate and knew that the royal line of Aeneas must
eventually rule Troy.
l. Many cities allied to Troy were now taken by Achilles: Lesbos, Phocaea, Colophon,
Smyrna, Clazomenae, Cyme, Aegialus, Tenos, Adramyttium, Dide, Endium, Linnaeum,
Colone, Lyrnessus, Antandrus, and several others, including Hypoplacian Thebes, where
another Eëtion, father of Hector’s wife Andromache, and his comrade Podes, ruled over the
Cilicians. Achilles killed Eëtion, and seven of his sons besides, but did not despoil his corpse:
he burned it fully armoured and around the barrow which he heaped, mountain-nymphs
planted a grove of elm-trees. The captives included Astynome, or Chryseis, daughter of
Chryses, priest of Apollo in the island of Sminthos. Some call Astynome Eëtion’s wife; others
say that Chryses had sent her to Lyrnessus for protection, or to attend a festival of Artemis.
When the spoils were distributed, she fell to Agamenmon, as did Briseis to Achilles. From Hypoplacian Thebes, Achilles also brought away the swift horse Podasus, whom he yoked to
his immortal team.
m. Great Ajax sailed to the Thracian Chersonese, where he captured Lycaon’s blood-
brother Polydorus—their mother was Laothoë—and in Teuthrania killed King Teuthras, and
carried off great spoils, among them the princess Tecmessa, whom he made his concubine.
n. As the tenth year of the war approached, the Greeks refrained from raiding the coast
of Asia Minor, and concentrated their forces before Troy. The Trojans marshalled their allies
against them—Dardanians, led by Aeneas and the two sons or Antenor; Thracian Ciconians;
Paeonians; Paphlagonians; Mysians; Phrygians; Maeonians; Carians; Lycians; and so forth.
Sarpedon, whom Bellerophon’s daughter Laodameia had borne to Zeus, led the Lycians. This
is his story. When Laodameia’s brother Isander and Hippolochus were contending for the
kingdom, it was proposed that whichever of them might shoot an arrow through a gold ring
hung upon a child’s breast should be king. Each hotly demanded the other’s child as the
victim, but Laodameia prevented them from murdering each other by offering to tie the ring
around the neck of her own son, Sarpedon. Astounded at such noble unselfishness, they both
agreed to resign their claims to the kingdom in favour of Sarpedon; with whom Glaucus, the
son of Hippolochus, was now reigning as co-king.
o. Agamemnon had sent Odysseus on a foraging expedition to Thrace, and when he
came back empty-handed, Palamedes son of Nauplius upbraided him for his sloth and
cowardice. ‘It was not my fault,’ cried Odysseus, ‘that no corn could be found. If
Agamemnon had sent you in my stead, you would have had no greater success.’ Thus
challenged, Palamedes set sail at once and presently reappeared with a ship-load of grain.
p. After days of tortuous thought, Odysseus at last hit upon a plan by which he might
be revenged on Palamedes; for his honour was wounded. He sent word to Agamemnon: ‘The
gods have warned me in a dream that treachery is afoot: the camp must be moved for a day
and a night.’ When Agamemnon gave immediate orders to have this done, Odysseus secretly
buried a sackful of gold at the place where Palamedes’s tent had been pitched. He then forced
a Phrygian prisoner to write a letter, as if from Priam to Palamedes, which read: ‘The gold
that I have sent is the price you asked for betraying the Greek camp.’ Having then ordered the
prisoner to hand Palamedes this letter, Odysseus had him killed just outside the camp, before
he could deliver it. Next day, when the army returned to the old site, someone found the
prisoner’s corpse and took the letter to Againchinon. Palamedes was court-martialled and,
when he boldly denied having taken gold from Priam or anyone else, Odysseus suggested that
his tent should searched. The gold was discovered, and the whole army ordered Palamedes to
death as a traitor.
q. Some say that Agamemnon, Odysseus, and Diomedes were all plicated in this plot,
and that they jointly dictated the false letter to the Phrygian and afterwards bribed a servant to
hide it with the gold under Palamedes’s bed. When Palamedes was led off to the place of
stoning he cried aloud: ‘Truth, I mourn for you, who have predeceased me!’
r. Others, again, say that Odysseus and Diomedes, pretending to have discovered a
treasure in a deep well, let Palamedes down into it by a rope, and then tumbled large stones on
his head; or that they drowned him on a fishing excursion. still others say that Paris killed him
with an arrow. It is not even agreed whether his death took place at Trojan Colonae, at
Geraestus, or on Tenedos; but he has a hero-shrine near Lesbian Methymna.
s. Palamedes had deserved the gratitude of his comrades by the invention of dice, with
which they whiled away their time before Troy; and the first set of which he dedicated in the
temple of Tyche at Argos. But all envied him his superior wisdom, because he had also
invented lighthouses, scales, measures, the discus, the alphabet, and the art of posting
sentinels.
t. When Nauplius heard of the murder, he sailed to Troy and claimed satisfaction; yet this was
denied him by Agamemnon, had been Odysseus’s accomplice and enjoyed the confidence off
all the Greek leaders. So Nauplius returned to Greece with his surviving son Oeax, and
brought false news to the wives of Palamedes’s murderers, saying to each: ‘Your husband is
bringing back a Trojan concubine as his new queen.’ Some of these unhappy wives thereupon
killed selves. Others committed adultery: as did Agamemnon’s wife Clytaemnestra, with
Aegisthus; Diomedes’s wife Aegialeia, with Comethes son of Sthenelus; and Idomeneus’s
wife Meda, with one Leucus.


THE WRATH OF ACHILLES

WINTER now drew on, and since this has never been a battle season among civilized
nations, the Greeks spent it enlarging their camp arid practising archery. Sometimes they
came across Trojan notables in the temple of Thymbraean Apollo, which was neutral territory;
and once, when Hecabe happened to be sacrificing there, Achilles arrived on the same errand
and fell desperately in love with her daughter Polyxena. He made no declaration at the time
but, returning to his hut in torment, sent the kindly Automedon to ask Hector on what terms
he might marry Polyxena. Hector replied: ‘She shall be his on the day that he betrays the
Greek camp to my father Priam.’ Achilles seemed willing enough to accept Hector’s
conditions, but drew back sullenly when informed that if he failed to betray the camp, he must
swear instead to murder his cousin Great Ajax and the sons of Athenian Pleisthenes.
b. Spring came and fighting was resumed. In the first engagement of the season
Achilles sought out Hector, but the watchful Helenus pierced his hand with an arrow shot
from an ivory bow, Apollo’s love gift, and forced him to give ground. Zeus himself guided
the arrow-head; and as he did so decided to relieve the Trojans, whom the raids and the
consequent desertion of certain Asiatic allies had greatly discouraged, by plaguing the Greeks
and detaching Achilles from his fellow-chieftains. When, therefore, Chryses came to ransom
Chryseis, Zeus persuaded Agamemnon to drive him away with opprobrious words; and
Apollo, invoked by Chryses, posted himself vengefully near the ships, shooting deadly arrows
among the Greeks day after day. Hundreds perished, though (as it happened) no kings or
princes suffered, and on the tenth day Calchas made known the presence of the god. At his
instance, Agamemnon grudgingly sent Chryseis back to her father, with propitiatory gifts, but
recouped his loss by taking Briseis from Achilles, to whom she had been allotted; whereupon
Achilles, in a rage, announced that he would take no further part in the War; and his mother
Thetis indignantly approached Zeus, who missed her satisfaction on his behalf. But some say
that Achilles kept out of the fighting in order to show his goodwill towards Priam as
Polyxena’s father.
c. When the Trojans became aware that Achilles and his Myrmidons had withdrawn
from the field, they took heart and made a vigorous sortie. Agamemnon, in alarm, granted
them a truce, during which Paris and Menelaus were to fight a duel for the possession of
Helen and the stolen treasure. The duel, however, proved indecisive, because when Aphrodite saw that Paris was getting the worst of it, she wrapped him in a magic mist and carried him
back to Troy. Hera then sent Athene down to break the truce by making Pandarus son of
Lycaon shoot an arrow at Menelaus, which she did; at the same time inspired Diomedes to
kill Pandarus and wound Aeneas and his mother Aphrodite. Glaucus son of Hippolochus now
opposed Diomedes, but both recalled the close friendship that had bound their fathers,
courteously exchanged arms.
d. Hector challenged Achilles to single combat; and when Achilles sent back word that
he had retired from the war, the Greeks sent Great Ajax as his substitute. These two
champions fought without pause until nightfall, when heralds parted them and each praised
the other’s skill and courage. Ajax gave Hector the brilliant purple baldric by which he was
later dragged to his death; and Hector gave Ajax the silver-studded sword with which he was
later to commit suicide.
e. An armistice being agreed upon, the Greeks raised a long barrow over their dead,
and crowned it with a wall beyond which they dug a deep, palisaded trench. But they had
omitted to appease the deities supported the Trojans and, when fighting was resumed, were
driven across the trench and behind the wall. That night the Trojans encamped close to the
Greek ships.
f. In despair, Agamemnon sent Phoenix, Ajax, Odysseus and two heralds to placate
Achilles, offering him countless gifts and Briseis (they were to swear that she was still a
virgin) if only he would fight again. It should be explained that Chryses had meanwhile
brought back his daughter, who protested that she had been very well treated by Agamemnon
and wished to remain with him; she was pregnant at the time and later gave birth to Chryses
the Second, a child of doubtful paternity. Achilles greeted the deputation with a pleasant smile,
but refused their offers, and announced that he must sail home next morning.
g. That same night about the third watch when the moon was high, Odysseus and
Diomedes, encouraged by a lucky auspice from Athene—a heron on their right hand—
decided to raid the Trojan lines. They happened to stumble over Dolon, son of Eumelus, who
had been sent out on patrol by the enemy and, after forcibly extracting information from him,
cut his throat. Odysseus then hid Dolon’s ferret-skin cap, wolf-skin cloak, bow and spear in a
tamarisk bush and hurried with Diomedes to the right flank of the Trojan line where, they
now knew, Rhesus the Thracian was encamped. He is variously described as the son of the
Muse Euterpe, or Calliope, by Eioneus, or Ares, or Strymon. Having stealthily assassinated
Rhesus and twelve of his companions in their sleep, they drove off his magnificent horses,
white as snow and swifter than the wind, and recovered the spoils from the tamarisk bush on
their way back. The capture of Rhesus’s horses was of the highest importance, since an oracle
had foretold that Troy would become impregnable once they had eaten Trojan fodder and
drunken from the river Scamander, and this they had not yet done. When the surviving
Thracians awoke, to find King Rhesus dead and his horses gone, they fled in despair; the
Greeks killed nearly every one of them.
h. On the following day, however, after a fierce struggle, in which Agamemnon,
Diomedes, Odysseus, Eurypylus, and Machaon the surgeon were all wounded, the Greeks
took to flight and Hector breached their wall. Encouraged by Apollo, he pushed on towards
the ships and, despite assistance lent by Poseidon to the two Ajaxes and Idomeneus, broke
through the Greek line. At this point Hera, who hated the Trojans, borrowed Aphrodite’s
girdle and persuaded Zeus to come and sleep with her; a ruse which allowed Poseidon to turn
the battle in the Greeks’ favour. But Zeus, soon discovering that he had been duped, revived
Hector (nearly killed by Ajax with a huge stone), ordered Poseidon off the field, and restored
the Trojans’ courage. Forward they went again: Medon killing Periphetes son of Copreus, and
many other champions.
i. Even Great Ajax was forced to yield ground; and Achilles, when he saw flames
swirling from the stern of Protesilaus’s ship, set on the Trojans, so far forgot his grudge as to
marshal the Myrmidons an hurry them to Patroclus’s assistance. Patroclus had flung a spear
into the mass of Trojans gathered around Protesilaus’s ship and transfixed Pyraechmes, king
of the Paeonians, At this the Trojans, mistaking him for Achilles, fled; and Patroclus
extinguished the fire, saving the of the ship at least, and cut down Sarpedon. Though Glaucus
tried to rally his Lycians and so protect Sarpedon’s body from despoiling, Zeus let Patroclus
chase the whole Trojan army towards the city, Hector being the first to retire, wounded
severely by Ajax.
j. The Greeks stripped Sarpedon of his armour, but at Zeus’s order Apollo rescued the
body, which he prepared for burial, whereupon Sleep and Death bore it away to Lycia.
Patroclus meanwhile pressed the route, and would have taken Troy single-handed, had not
Apollo hastily mounted the wall, and thrice thrust him back with a shield as he attempted to
scale it. Fighting continued until nightfall, when Apollo wrapped in a thick mist, came up
behind Patroclus and buffeted him smartly between the shoulder blades. Patroclus’s eyes
started from head; his helmet flew off; his spear was shattered into splinters; shield fell to the
ground; and Apollo grimly unlaced his corslet. Euphorbus son of Panthous, observing
Patroclus’s plight, wounded him without fear of retaliation, and as he staggered away, Hector,
who had returned to the battle, despatched him with a single blow.
k. Up ran Menelaus and killed Euphorbus—who is said, by the way to have been
reincarnate centuries later in the philosopher Pythagoras and strutted off to his hut with the
spoils; leaving Hector to strip Patroclus of his borrowed armour. Menelaus and Great Ajax
then reappeared and together defended Patroclus’s body until dusk, when they contrived to
carry it back to the ships. But Achilles, on hearing news, rolled in the dust, and yielded to an
ecstasy of grief.
l. Thetis entered her son’s hut carrying a new suit of armour, which included a pair of
valuable tin greaves, hurriedly forged by Hephaestus. Achilles put the suit on, made peace
with Agamemnon (who delivered Briseis to him inviolate, swearing that he had taken her in
anger, not in lust) and set out to avenge Patroclus. None could stand against wrath. The
Trojans broke and fled to the Scamander, where he divided them into two bodies, driving one
across the plain towards the city and penning the other in a bend of the river. Furiously, the
River-god rushed at him, but Hephaestus took Achilles’s part and dried up the waters with a
scorching flame. The Trojan survivors regained the city, like a herd of frightened deer.
m. When Achilles at last met Hector and engaged him in single combat, both sides
drew back and stood watching amazed. Hector turned and began to run around the city walls.
He hoped by this manoeuvre to weary Achilles, who had long been inactive and should
therefore have been short of breath. But he was mistaken. Achilles chased him thrice around
the walls, and whenever he made for the shelter of a gate, counting on the help of his brothers,
always headed him off. Finally Hector halted and stood his ground, but Achilles ran him
through the breast, and refused his dying plea that his body might be ransomed for burial.
After possessing himself of the armour, Achilles slit the flesh behind the tendons of Hector’s
heels. He then passed leather thongs through the slits, secured them to his chariot and,
whipping up Balius, Xanthus, and Pedasus, dragged the body towards the ships at an easy
canter. Hector’s head, its black locks streaming on either side, climbed up a cloud of dust
behind him. But some say that Achilles dragged the corpse three times around the city walls,
by the baldric which Ajax had given him.
n. Achilles now buried Patroclus. Five Greek princes were sent to Mount Ida in search
of timber for the funeral pyre, upon which Achilles sacrificed not only horses, and two of
Patroclus’s own pack of nine hounds, but twelve noble Trojan captives, several sons of Priam
among them, by cutting their throats. He even threatened to throw Hector’s corpse to the remaining hounds; Aphrodite, however, restrained him. At Patroclus’s funeral games
Diomedes won the chariot race, and Epeius, despite his cowardice, the boxing-match; Ajax
and Odysseus tied in the wrestling match.
o. Still consumed by grief, Achilles rose every day at dawn to drag Hector’s body
three times around Patroclus’s tomb. Yet Apollo protected it from corruption and laceration
and, eventually, at the command of Zeus, Hermes led Priam to the Greek camp under cover of
night, and persuaded Achilles to accept a ransom. On this occasion Priam showed great
magnanimity towards Achilles whom he had found asleep in his hut and might easily have
murdered. The ransom agreed upon was Hector’s weight in gold. Accordingly, the Greeks set
up a pair of scales outside the city walls, laid the corpse on one pan, and invited the Trojans to
heap gold in the other. When Priam’s treasury had been ransacked of ingots and jewels, and
Hector’s huge bulk still depressed the pan, Polyxena, watching from the wall, threw down her
bracelets to supply the missing weight. Overcome by admiration, Achilles told Priam: ‘I will
cheerfully barter Hector against Polyxena. Keep your gold; marry her to me; and if you then
restore Helen to Menelaus, I undertake to make peace between your people and ours.’ Priam,
for the moment, was content to ransom Hector at the agreed price in gold; but promised to
give Polyxena to Achilles freely if he persuaded the Greeks to depart without Helen. Achilles
replied that he would do what he could, and Priam then took away the corpse for burial. So
great an uproar arose at Hector’s funeral—the Trojans lamenting, the Greeks trying to drown
their dirges with boos and cat-calls—that birds flying overhead fell down stunned by the noise.
p. At the command of an oracle, Hector’s bones were eventually taken to Boeotian
Thebes, where his grave is still shown beside the lot-retain of Oedipus. Some quote the Oracle
as follows:
Hearken, ye men of Thebes, who dwell in the city of Cadmus,
Should you desire your land to be prosperous, wealthy and blameless,
Carry the bones of Hector, Priam’s son, to your city.
Asia holds them now; there Zeus will attend to his worship.’
Others say that when a plague ravaged Greece, Apollo ordered the reburial of Hector’s bones
in a famous Greek city which had taken part in the Trojan War.
q. A wholly different tradition makes Hector a son of Apollo, who Penthesileia the Amazon
killed.


THE DEATH OF ACHILLES

THE Amazon Queen Pentheseleia, daughter of Otrere and Ares, had sought refuge in
Troy from the Erinnyes of her sister Hippolyte (also called Glauce or Melanippe), whom she
had accidentally shot, either while out hunting or, according to the Athenians, in the fight
which followed Theseus's marriage to Phaedra. Purified by Priam, she greatly distinguished
herself in battle, accounting for many Greeks, among them (it is said) Machaon, though the
commoner account makes him fall by the hand of Eurypylus, son of Telephus. She drove
Achilles from the field on several occasions—some even claim that she killed him and that
Zeus, at the plea of Thetis, restored him to life but at last he ran her through, fell in love with
her dead body, and committed necrophilia on it there and then. When he later called on volunteers to bury Pentheseleia, Thersites, a son of Aetolian Agrius, and the ugliest Greek at
Troy, who had gouged out her eyes with his spear as she lay dying, jeeringly accused Achilles
of filthy and unnatural lust. Achilles turned and struck Thersites so hard he broke every tooth
in his head and sent his ghost scurrying down to Tartarus.
b. This caused high indignation among the Greeks, and Diomedes, who was a cousin
of Thersites and wished to show his disdain for Achilles, dragged Penthesileia’s body along
by the foot and threw it into the Scamander; whence, however, it was rescued and buried on
the bank with great honour—some say by Achilles; others, by the Trojans. Achilles then set
sail for Lesbos, where he sacrificed to Apollo, Artemis, and Leto; and Odysseus, a sworn
enemy to Thersites, purified him of the murder. The dying Penthesileia, supported by Achilles,
is carved on the throne of Zeus at Olympia. Her nurse, the Amazon Clete, hearing that she had
fled to Troy after the death of Hippolyte, set out to search for her, but was driven by contrary
winds to Italy, where she settled and founded the city of Clete.
c. Priam had by now persuaded his half-brother, Tithonus of Assyria, to send his son
Memnon the Ethiopian to Troy; the bribe he offered was a golden vine. A so-called palace of
Memnon is shown in Ethiopia, although when Tithonus emigrated to Assyria and founded
Susa, Memnon, then only a child, had gone with him. Susa is now commonly known as the
City of Memnon; and its inhabitants as Cissians, after Memnon’s mother Cissia. His palace on
the Acropolis was standing until the time of the Persians.
d. Tithonus governed the province of Persia for the Assyrian king Teutamus, Priam’s
overlord, who put Memnon in command of a thousand Ethiopians, a thousand Susians, and
two hundred chariots. The Phrygians still show the rough, straight road, with camp-sites every
fifteen miles or so, by which Memnon, after he had subjugated all the intervening nations,
marched to Troy. He was black as ebony, but the handsomest man alive, and like Achilles
wore armour forged by Hephaestus. Some say that he led a large army of Ethiopians and
Indians to Troy by way of Armenia, and that another expedition sailed from Phoenicia at his
orders under a Sidonian named Phalas. Landing on Rhodes, the inhabitants of which favoured
the Greek cause, Phalas was asked in public: ‘Are you not ashamed, sir, to assist Paris the
Trojan and other declared enemies of your native city?’ The Phoenician sailors, who now
heard for the first time where they were bound, stoned Phalas to death as a traitor and settled
in Ialysus and Cameirus, after dividing among themselves the treasure and munitions of war
which Phalas had brought with him.
e. Meanwhile, at Troy, Memnon killed several leading Greeks, including Antilochus,
son of Nestor, when he came to his father’s rescue: for Paris had shot one of Nestor’s chariot
horses and terror made its team-mate unmanageable. This Antilochus had been exposed as a
child on Mount Ida by his mother Anaxibia, or Eurydice, and there suckled by a bitch.
Though too young to sail from Aulis at the beginning of the war, he followed some years later
and begged Achilles to soothe Nestor’s anger at his unexpected arrival. Achilles, delighted
with Antilochus’s warlike spirit, undertook to mediate between them and, at his desire, Nestor
introduced him to Agamemnon. Antilochus was one of the youngest, handsomest, swiftest
and most courageous Greeks who fought at Troy and Nestor, having been warned by an
oracle to protect him against an Ethiopian, appointed Calion as his guardian; but in vain. The
bones of Antilochus were laid beside those of his friends, Achilles and Patroclus, whose
ghosts he accompanied to the Asphodel Fields.
f. That day, with the help of Memnon’s Ethiopians, the Trojans nearly succeeded in
burning the Greek ships, but darkness fell and they retired. After burying their dead, the
Greeks chose Great Ajax to replace Memnon; and next morning the single combat had
already begun, when Thetis sought out Achilles, who was absent from the camp, and broke
the news of Antilochus’s death. Achilles hastened back to take vengeance, and while Zeus,
calling for a pair of scales, weighed his fate against that of Memnon, he brushed Ajax aside and made the combat his own. The pan containing Memnon’s fate sank in Zeus’s hand,
Achilles dealt the death-blow, and presently black head and bright armour crowned the
flaming pyre of Antilochus.
g. Some, however, report that Memnon was ambushed by Thessalians; and that his
Ethiopians, having burned his body, carried the ashes to Tithonus; and that they now lie
buried on a hill overlooking the mouth of the river Aesepus, where a village bears his name.
Eos, who is described as Memnon’s mother, implored Zeus to confer immortality upon him
and some further honour as well. A number of phantom hen-birds, called Memnonides, were
consequently formed from the embers and smoke of his pyre, and rising into the air, flew
three times around it. At the fourth circuit they divided into two flocks, fought with claws and
beaks, and fell down upon his ashes as a funeral sacrifice. Memnonides still fight and fall at
his tomb when the Sun has all the signs of the Zodiac.
h. According to another tradition, these birds are Memnon’s girl companions, who
lamented for him so excessively that the gods, in pity, metamorphosed them into birds. They
make an annual visit to his tomb, where they weep and lacerate themselves until some of
them fall dead. The Hellespontines say that when the Memnonides visit Memnon’s grave
beside the Hellespont, they use their wings to sprinkle it with water from the river Aesepus;
and that Eos still weeps tears of dew for him every morning. Polygnotus has pictured
Memnon facing his rival Sarpedon and dressed in a cloak embroidered with these birds. The
gods are said to observe the anniversaries of both their deaths as days of mourning.
i. Others believe that Memnon’s bones were taken to Cyprian Paphus, and thence to
Rhodes, where his sister Himera, or Hemera, came to fetch them away. The Phoenicians who
had rebelled against Phalas allowed her to do so on condition that she did not press for the
return of their stolen treasure. To this she agreed, and brought the urn to Phoenicia; she buried
it there at Palliochis and then disappeared. Others, again, say that Memnon’s tomb is to be
seen near Palton in Syria, beside the river Badas. His bronze sword hangs on the wall of
Asclepius’s temple at Nicomedeia; and Egyptian Thebes is famous a colossal black statue—a
seated stone figure—which utters a sound the breaking of a lyre-string every day at sunrise.
All Greek—speaking people call it Memnon; not so the Egyptians.
j. Achilles now routed the Trojans and pursued them towards city, but his course, too,
was run. Poseidon and Apollo, pledged to avenge the deaths of Cycnus and Troilus, and to
punish certain insolent boasts that Achilles had uttered over Hector’s corpse, took counsel
together. Veiled with cloud and standing by the Scaean Gate, Apollo sought out Paris in the
thick of battle, turned his bow and guided fatal shaft. It struck the one vulnerable part of
Achilles’s body, the heel, and he died in agony. But some say that Apollo, assuming likeness
of Paris, himself shot Achilles; and that this was the acer which Neoptolemus, Achilles’s son,
accepted. A fierce battle raged that day over the corpse. Great Ajax struck down Glaucus,
despoiled of his armour, sent it back to the camp and, despite a shower of arrows carried dead
Achilles through the midst of the enemy, Odysseus bring up the rear. A tempest sent by Zeus
then put an end to the struggle.
k. According to another tradition, Achilles was the victim of a plot. Priam had offered
him Polyxena in marriage on condition that siege of Troy was raised. But Polyxena, who
could not forgive Achilles for murdering her brother Troilus, made him disclose vulnerability
of his heel, since there is no secret that women cannot extract from men in proof of love. At
her request he came, bare and unarmed, to ratify the agreement by sacrificing to Thymbraean
Apollo; then, while Deiphobus clasped him to his breast in pretended friendship, Paris, hiding
behind the god’s image, pierced his heel with a poisoned arrow or, some say, a sword. Before
dying, hovering Achilles seized firebrands from the altar and laid about him vigorously,
felling many Trojans and temple servants. Meanwhile, Odysseus, Ajax, and Diomedes,
suspecting Achilles of treachery, had followed him to the temple. Paris and Deiphobus rushed past them through the doorway, they entered, and Achilles, expiring in their arms, begged
them, after Troy fell, to sacrifice Polyxena at his tomb. Ajax carried body out of the shrine on
his shoulders; the Trojans tried to capture them but the Greeks drove them off and conveyed it
to the ships. Some on the other hand, claim that the Trojans won the tussle and did not
surrender Achilles’s body until the ransom which Priam paid for Hector been returned.
l. The Greeks were dismayed by their loss. Poseidon, however, promised Thetis to
bestow on Achilles an island in the Black Sea, where the coastal tribes would offer him divine
sacrifices for all eternity. A company of Nereids came to Troy to mourn with her and stood
desolately around his corpse, while the nine Muses chanted the dirge. Their mourning lasted
seventeen days and nights, but though Agamemnon and his fellow-leaders shed many tears,
none of the common soldiers greatly regretted the death of so notorious a traitor. On the
eighteenth day, Achilles’s body was burned upon a pyre and his ashes, mixed with those of
Patroclus, were laid in a golden urn made by Hephaestus, Thetis’s wedding gift from
Dionysus; this was buried on the headland of Sigaeum, which dominates the Hellespont, and
over it the Greeks raised a lofty cairn as a landmark. In a neighbouring village called
Achilleum stands a temple sacred to Achilles, and his statue wearing a woman’s ear-ring.
m. While the Achaeans were holding funeral games in his honour—Eumelus winning
the chariot race, Diomedes the foot-race, Ajax the discus-throw, and Teucer the archery
contest—Thetis snatched Achilles’s soul from the pyre and conveyed it to Leuce, an island
about twenty furlongs in circumference, wooded and full of beasts, both wild and tame, which
lies opposite the mouths of the Danube, and is now sacred to him. Once, when a certain
Crotonian named Leonymus, who had been severely wounded in the breast while fighting his
neighbours, the Epizephyrian Locrians, visited Delphi to enquire how he might be cured, the
Pythoness told him: ‘Sail to Leuce. There Little Ajax, whose ghost your enemies invoked to
fight for them, will appear and heal your wound.’ He returned some months later, safe and
well, reporting that he had seen Achilles, Patroclus, Antilochus, Great Ajax, and finally Little
Ajax, who had healed him. Helen, now married to Achilles, had said: ‘Pray, Leonymus, sail to
Himera, and tell the libeller of Helen that the loss of his sight is due to her displeasure.’
Sailors on the northward run from the Bosphorus to Olbia frequently hear Achilles chanting
Homer’s verses across the water, the sound being accompanied by the clatter of horses’
hooves, shouts of warriors, and clash of arms.
n. Achilles first lay with Helen, not long before his death, in a dream arranged by his
mother Thetis. This experience afforded him such pleasure that he asked Helen to display
herself to him in waking life on the wall of Troy. She did so, and he fell desperately in love.
Since he was her fifth husband, they call him Pemptus, meaning ‘fifth’ on Crete; Theseus,
Menelaus, Paris, and finally Deiphobus, having been his predecessors.
o. But others hold that Achilles remains under the power of Hades, and complains
bitterly of his lot as he strides about the Asphodel Meadows; others, again, that he married
Medea and lives royally in the Elysian Fields, or the Islands of the Blessed.
p. By order of an oracle, a cenotaph was set up for Achilles in the ancient gymnasium
at Olympia; there, at the opening of the festival, the sun is sinking, the Elean women honour
him with funeral rites. The Thessalians, at the command of the Dodonian Oracle, also
sacrifice annually to Achilles; and on the road which leads northward from Sparta stands a
sanctuary built for him by Prax, his great-grandson which is closed to the general public; but
the boys who are required to fight in a near-by plane-tree grove enter and sacrifice to him
before.


THE MADNESS OF AJAX

WHEN Thetis decided to award the arms of Achilles to the most courageous Greek
left alive before Troy, only Ajax and Odysseus, who had boldly defended the corpse together,
dared come forward to claim them. Some say that Agamemnon, from a dislike of the whole
House of Aeacus, rejected Ajax’s pretensions and divided the arms between Menelaus and
Odysseus, whose goodwill he valued far more highly; others, that he avoided the odium of a
decision by referring the case to the assembled Greek leaders, who settled it by a secret ballot;
or that he referred it to the Cretans and other allies; or that he forced his Trojan prisoners to
declare which of the two claimants had done them most harm. But the truth is that, while Ajax
and Odysseus were still competitively boasting of their achievements, Nestor advised
Agamemnon to send spies by night to listen under the Trojan walls for the enemy’s unbiased
opinion on the matter. The spies overheard a party of young girls chattering together; and
when one praised Ajax for bearing dead Achilles from the battlefield through a storm of
missiles, another, at Athene’s instigation, replied: ‘Nonsense! Even a slave-woman will do as
much, once someone has set a corpse on her shoulders; but thrust weapons into her hand, and
she will be too frightened to use them. Odysseus, not Ajax, bore the brunt of our attack.’
b. Agamemnon therefore awarded the arms to Odysseus. He and Menelaus would
never, of course, have dared to insult Ajax in this manner had Achilles still been alive: for
Achilles thought the world of his gallant cousin. It was Zeus himself who provoked the
quarrel.
c. In a dumb rage, Ajax planned to revenge himself on his fellow Greeks that very
night; Athene, however, struck him with madness and turned him loose, sword in hand,
among the cattle and sheep which had been lifted from Trojan farms to form part of the
common spoil. After immense slaughter, he chained the surviving beasts together, hauled
them back to the camp, and there continued his butcher’s worth. Choosing two white-looted
rams, he lopped off the head and tongue of one, which he mistook for Agamemnon, or
Menelaus; and tied the other upright to a pillar, where he flogged it with a horse’s halter,
screaming abuse and calling it perfidious Odysseus.
d. At last coming to his senses in utter despair, he summoned Eurysaces, his son by
Tecmessa, and gave him the huge, sevenfold shield after which he had been named. ‘The rest
of my arms will be buried with me when I die,’ he said. Ajax’s half-brother Teucer, son of
Priam’s captive sister Hesione, happened to be away in Mysia, but Ajax left a message
appointing him guardian of Eurysaces, who was to be taken home to his grandparents
Telamon and Eriboea of Salamis. Then, with a word to Tecmessa that he would escape
Athene’s anger by bathing in a sea pool and finding some untrodden patch of ground where
the sword might be securely buried, he set out, determined on death.
e. He fixed the sword—the very one which Hector had exchanged for the purple
baldric—upright in the earth, and after calling on Zeus to tell Teucer where his corpse might
be found; on Hermes, to conduct his soul to the Asphodel Fields; and on the Erinnyes, for vengeance, threw himself upon it. The sword, loathing its task, doubled back in the shape of a
bow, and dawn had broken before he contrived to commit suicide by driving the point
underneath his vulnerable arm-pit.
f. Meanwhile Teucer, returning from Mysia, narrowly escaped murder by the Greeks,
who were indignant at the slaughter of their livestock. Calchas, having been granted no
prophetic warning of the suicide, took Teucer aside and advised him to confine Ajax to his
hut, as one maddened by the wrath of Athene. Podaleirius son of Asclepius agreed; he was as
expert a physician as his brother Machaon was a surgeon, and had been the first to diagnose
Ajax’s madness from his flashing eyes. But Teucer merely shook his head, having already
been confirmed by Zeus of his brother’s death, and went sadly out with Tecmessa to find the
corpse.
g. There Ajax lay in a pool of blood, and dismay overcame Teucer. How could he
return to Salamis, and face his father Telamon? As he stopped, tearing his hair, Menelaus
strode up and forbade him to bury Ajax, who must be left for the greedy kites and pious
vultures. Teucer sent him about his business, and leaving Eurysaces in suppliant’s dress to
display locks of his own, Teucer’s, and Tecmessa’s hair, and so guard Ajax’s corpse—over
which Tecmessa had spread her robe—he came crying before Agamemnon. Odysseus
intervened in the ensuing dispute, and not only urged Agamemnon to permit the funeral rites,
but offered to help Teucer carry them out. This service Teucer declined, while acknowledging
Odysseus’s courtesy. Finally Agamemnon, on Calchas’s advice, allowed Ajax to be buried in
a suicide’s coffin at Cape Rhoeteum, rather than burned on a pyre as if he had fallen
honourably in the battle.
h. Some hold that the cause of the quarrel between Ajax and Odysseus was the
possession of the Palladium, and that it took place after Troy had fallen. Others deny that
Ajax committed suicide, and say that since he was proof against steel, the Trojans killed him
with lumps of clay, having been advised to do so by an oracle. But this may have been
another Ajax.
i. Afterwards, when Odysseus visited the Asphodel Fields, Ajax was there only ghost
who stood aloof from him, rejecting his excuses that Zeus had been responsible for this
unfortunate affair. Odysseus had by that time wisely presented the arms to Achilles’s son
Neoptolemus; while the Aeolians who later settled at Troy say that he lost them in a
shipwreck as he sailed home, whereupon by Thetis’s contrivance the waves deposited them
beside Ajax’s tomb at Rhoeteum. During the reign of the Emperor Hadrian, high seas washed
open the tomb and his bones were seen to be of gigantic size, the knee-caps alone being as big
as a discus used by boys for practising for the pentathlon; at the Emperor’s orders, they were
at once reinterred.
j. The Salaminians report that a new flower appeared in their island when Ajax died:
white, tinged with red, smaller than a lily and, like the hyacinth, bearing letters which spell Ai!
Ai! (‘woe, woe!’). But it is generally believed that the new flower sprang from Ajax’s blood
where he fell, since the letters also stand for Aias Aiacides, ‘Ajax the Aeacid’. In the
Salaminian market place stands a temple of Ajax, with an ebony image; and not far from the
harbour a boulder is shown on which Telamon sat gazing at the ship which bore his sons
away to Aulis.
k. Teucer eventually returned to Salamis, but Telamon accused him of fratricide in the
second degree, since he had not pressed Ajax’s claim to the disputed arms. Forbidden to land,
he pleaded his case from the sea while the judges listened on the shore; Telamon himself had
been forced to do the same by his own father Aeacus, when accused of murdering his brother
Phocus. But as Telamon had been found guilty and banished, so also was Teucer, on the
ground that he had brought back neither Ajax’s bones, nor Tecmessa, nor Eurysaces; which proved neglect. He set sail for Cyprus, where with Apollo’s favour and the permission of
King Belus the Sidonian he founded the other Salamis.
l. The Athenians honour Ajax as one of their eponymous heroes, and insist that
Philaeus, the son of Eurysaces, became an Athenian citizen and surrendered the sovereignty
of Salamis to them.


THE ORACLES OF TROY

ACHILLES was dead, and the Greeks had begun to despair. Calchas now prophesied
that Troy could not be taken except with the help of Heracles’s bow and arrows. Odysseus
and Diomedes were therefore deputed to sail for Lemnos and fetch them from Philoctetes,
their present owner.
b. Some say that King Actor’s shepherd Phimachus, son of Dolophion, had sheltered
Philoctetes and dressed his noisome wound for past ten years. Others record that some of
Philoctetes’s troops settled beside him in Lemnos, and that the Asclepius cured him, with
Lemnian earth, before the deputation arrived; or that Pylius, or Pelius, a son of Hephaestus,
did so. Philoctetes is said then conquered certain small islands off the Trojan coast for the
king Euneus, dispossessing the Carian population—a kindness that Euneus acknowledged by
giving him the Lemnian district of Acesa. Thus, it is explained, Odysseus and Diomedes had
no need to tempt Philoctetes with offers of medical treatment; he came willingly carrying his
bow and arrows, to win the war for them and glory himself. According to still another account,
the deputation found him long dead of the wound and persuaded his heirs to let them borrow
the bow.
c. The truth is, however, that Philoctetes stayed in Lemnos painfully, until Odysseus
tricked him into handing over the bow and arrows; but Diomedes (not, as some mistakenly
say, Neoptolemus) declined to be implicated in the theft and advised Philoctetes to demand
the return of his property. At this, the god Heracles intervened. ‘Go with them to Troy,
Philoctetes,’ he said, ‘and I will send an Asclepid there to cure you; for Troy must fall a second time to my arrows. You shall be chosen from among the Greeks as the boldest fighter
of all! You shall kill Paris, take part in the sack of Troy, and send home rich spoils, reserving
the noblest prize for your father Poeas. But remember: you cannot take Troy without
Neoptolemus son of Achilles, nor can he do so without you!’
d. Philoctetes obeyed, and on his arrival at the Greek camp he bathed with fresh water
and put to sleep in Apollo’s temple; and as he slept, Machaon the surgeon cut away the
decaying flesh from the wound, poured in wine, and applied healing herbs and the serpentine
stone. But some say that Machaon’s brother Podaleirius, the physician, took charge of the
case.
e. No sooner was Philoctetes about again, than he challenged Paris to a combat in
archery. The first arrow he shot went wide, the second pierced Paris’s bow-hand, the third
blinded his right eye, and the fourth struck his ankle, wounding him mortally. Despite
Menelaus attempt to despatch Paris, he contrived to hobble from the field, and take refuge in
Troy. That night the Trojans carried him to Mount Ida, where he begged his former mistress,
the nymph Oenone, to heal him; from an inveterate hatred of Helen, however, she cruelly
shook her head and he was brought back to die. Presently Oenone relented, and ran to Troy
with a basketful of healing drugs, but found him already dead. In a frenzy of grief she leaped
from the walls, or hanged herself, or burned herself to death on his pyre—no one remembers
which. Some excuse Oenone by saying that she would have healed Paris at once, had not her
father prevented her; she was obliged to wait until he had left the house before bringing the
simples, and then it proved too late.
f. Helenus and Deiphobus now quarrelled for Helen’s hand, and Priam supported
Deiphobus’s claim on the ground that he had shown the greater valour; but, though her
marriage to Paris had been divinely arranged, Helen could not forget that she was still Queen
of Sparta and wife to Menelaus. One night, a sentry caught her tying a rope to the battlements
in an attempt to escape. She was led before Deiphobus, who married her by force—much to
the disgust of the other Trojans. Helenus immediately left the city and went to live with
Arisbe on the slopes of Mount Ida.
g. Upon hearing from Calchas that Helenus alone knew the secret oracles which
protected Troy, Agamemnon sent Odysseus to waylay and drag him to the Greek camp.
Helenus happened to be staying as Chryses’s guest in the temple of Thymbraean Apollo,
when Odysseus came in search of him, and proved ready enough to disclose the oracles, on
condition that he would be given a secure home in some distant land. He had deserted Troy,
he explained, not because he feared death, but because neither he nor Aeneas could overlook
Paris’s sacrilegious murder of Achilles in this very temple, for which no amends had yet been
made to Apollo.
h. ‘So be it. Hold nothing back, and I will guarantee your life and safety,’ said
Odysseus.
‘The oracles are brief and clear,’ Helenus answered. ‘Troy falls this summer, if a
certain bone of Pelops is brought to your camp; if Neoptolemus takes the field; and if
Athene’s Palladium is stolen from the citadel—because the walls cannot be breached while it
remains there.
Agamemnon at once sent to Pisa for Pelops’s shoulder-blade. Meanwhile, Odysseus, Phoenix,
and Diomedes sailed to Scyros, where they persuaded Lycomedes to let Neoptolemus come to
Troy—some say that he was then only twelve years old. The ghost of Achilles appeared
before him on his arrival, and he forthwith distinguished himself both in council and in war,
Odysseus gladly resigning Achilles’s arms to him.
i. Eurypylus son of Telephus now reinforced the Trojans with an army of Mysians, and
Priam, who had offered his mother Astyoche a golden vine if he came, betrothed him to
Cassandra. Eurypylus proved a resolute fighter, and killed Machaon the surgeon; which is why, in Asclepius’s sanctuary at Pergamus, where every service begins with a hymn
celebrating Telephus, the name of his son Eurypylus may not be spoken on any occasion.
Machaon’s bones were taken back to Pylus by Nestor, and sick people are healed in the
sanctuary at Geraneia; his garlanded bronze statue dominates the sacred place called ‘The
Rose’. Eurypylus himself was killed by Neoptolemus.
j. Shortly before the fall of Troy, the dissensions between Priam’s sons grew so fierce
that he authorized Antenor to negotiate peace with Agamemnon. On his arrival at the Greek
camp Antenor, out of hatred for Deiphobus, agreed to betray the Palladium and the city into
Odysseus’s hands; his price was the kingship and half of Priam’s treasure. Aeneas, he told
Agamemnon, could also be counted upon to help.
k. Together they concocted a plan, in pursuance of which Odysseus asked Diomedes
to flog him mercilessly; then, bloodstained, filthy, and dressed in rags, he gained admittance
into Troy as a runaway slave. Helen alone saw through his disguise, but when she privately
questioned him, was fobbed off with evasive answers. Nevertheless, he could not decline an
invitation to her house, where she bathed, anointed and clothed him in free robes; and his
identity being thus established beyond question, swore a solemn oath that she would not
betray him to the Trojans—so far she had confided only in Hecabe—if he revealed all the
details of his plan to her. Helen explained that she was now kept a prisoner in Troy, and
longed to go home. At this juncture, Hecabe entered. Odysseus at once threw himself at her
feet, weeping for terror, and implored her not to denounce him. Surprisingly enough, she
agreed. He then hurried back, guided by Hecabe, and reached iris friends in safety with a
harvest of information; claiming to have killed a number of Trojans who would not open the
gates for him.
l. Some say that Odysseus stole the Palladium on this occasion, single-handed. Others
say that he and Diomedes, as favourites of Athene, were chosen to do so, and that they
climbed up to the citadel by way of a narrow and muddy conduit, killed the sleeping guards,
and together took possession of the image, which the priestess Theano, Antenor’s wife,
willingly surrendered. The common account, however, is that Diomedes scaled the wall by
climbing upon Odysseus’s shoulders, because the ladder was short, and entered Troy alone.
When he reappeared, carrying the Palladium in his arms, the two of them set out for the camp,
side by side, under a full moon; but Odysseus wanted all the glory. He dropped behind
Diomedes, to whose shoulders the image was now strapped, and would have murdered him,
had not the shadow of his sword caught Diomedes’s eye, the moon being still low in the
heavens. He spun about, drew his own sword and, disarming Odysseus, twisted his hands and
drove him back to the ships with repeated kicks and blows. Hence the phrase ‘Diomedes’s
compulsion’, often applied to those whose actions are coerced.
m. The Romans pretend that Odysseus and Diomedes carried off a mere replica of the
Palladium which was on public display, and that Aeneas, at the fall of Troy, rescued the
authentic image, smuggled it out with the remainder of his sacred luggage, and brought it safe
to Italy.


THE WOODEN HORSE

ATHENE now inspired Prylis, son of Hermes, to suggest that entry should be gained
into Troy by means of a wooden horse; and Epeius, son of Panopeus, a Phocian from
Parnassus, volunteered to build one under Athene’s supervision. Afterwards, of course,
Odysseus claimed all the credit for this stratagem.
b. Epeius had brought thirty ships from the Cyclades to Troy. He held the office of
water—bearer to the House of Atreus; as appears in the frieze of Apollo’s temple at Carthea,
and though a skilled boxer and a consummate craftsman, was born a coward, in divine
punishment for his father’s breach of faith—Panopeus had falsely sworn in Athene’s name
not to embezzle any part of the Taphian booty won by Amphitryon. Epeius’s cowardice has
since become proverbial.
c. He built an enormous hollow horse of fir planks, with a trap-door fitted into one
flank, and large letters cut on the other which consecrated it to Athene: ‘In thankful
anticipation of a safe return to their homes, the Greeks dedicate this offering to the Goddess.’
Odysseus persuaded the bravest of the Greeks to climb fully armed up a rope-ladder and
through the trap-door into the belly of the horse. Their number is variously given as twenty-
three, thirty or more, fifty, and, absurdly enough, three thousand. Among them were
Menelaus, Odysseus, Diomedes, Sthenelus, Acamas, Thoas, and Neoptolemus. Coaxed,
threatened, and bribed, Epeius himself joined the party. He climbed up last, drew the ladder in
after him and, since he alone knew how to work the trap-door, took his seat beside the lock.
d. At nightfall, the remaining Greeks under Agamemnon followed Odysseus’s
instructions, which were to burn their camp, put out to sea, and wait off Tenedos and the
Calydnian Islands until the following evening. Only Odysseus’s first cousin Sinon, a grandson
of Autolycus, stayed behind to light a signal beacon for their return.
e. At break of day, Trojan scouts reported that the camp lay in ashes and that the
Greeks had departed, leaving a huge horse on the seashore. Priam and several of his sons went
out to view it and, as they stood staring in wonder, Thymoetes was the first to break the
silence. ‘Since this is a gift to Athene,’ he said, ‘I propose that we take it into Troy and haul it
up to her citadel.’ ‘No, no!’ cried Capys. ‘Athene favoured the Greeks too long; we must
either burn it at once or break it open to see what the belly contains.’ But Priam declared:
‘Thymoetes is right. We will fetch it in on rollers. Let nobody desecrate Athene’s property.’
The horse proved too broad to be squeezed through the gates. Even when the wall had been
breached, it stuck four times. With enormous efforts the Trojans then hauled it up to the
citadel; but at least took the precaution of repairing the breach behind them. Another heated
argument followed when Cassandra announced that the horse contained armed men, and was
supported in her view by the seer Laocoön, son of Antenor, whom some mistakenly call the
brother of Anchises. Crying: ‘You fools, never trust a Greek even if he brings you gifts!’, he
hurled his spear, which stuck quivering in the horse’s flank and caused the weapons inside to lash together. Cheers and shouts arose: ‘Burn it!’ ‘Hurl it over the walls!’ But, 'Let it stay,’
pleaded Priam’s supporters.
f. This argument was interrupted by the arrival of Sinon, whom a couple of Trojan
soldiers were marching up in chains. Under interrogation, he said that Odysseus had long
been trying to destroy him because he knew the secret of Palamedes’s murder. The Greeks, he
went on, were heartily sick of the war, and would have sailed home months before this, but
that the uninterrupted bad weather prevented them. Apollo had advised them to placate the
Winds with blood, as when they were delayed at Aulis. ‘Whereupon,’ Sinon continued,
‘Odysseus dragged Calchas forward, and asked him to name the victim. Calchas would not
give an immediate answer and went into retirement for ten days, at the end of which time,
doubtless bribed by Odysseus, he entered the Council hut and pointed at me. All present
welcomed this verdict, every man relieved at not being chosen as the scapegoat, and I was put
in fetters; but a favourable wind sprang up, my companions hurriedly launched their vessels,
and in the confusion I made my escape.’
g. Thus Priam was tricked into accepting Sinon as a suppliant, and had his fetters
broken. ‘Now tell us about this horse,’ he said kindly. Sinon explained that the Greeks had
forfeited Athene’s support, on which they depended, when Odysseus and Diomedes stole the
Palladium from her temple. No sooner had they brought it to their camp than the image was
three times enveloped by flames, and its limbs sweated in proof of the goddess’s wrath.
Calchas thereupon advised Agamemnon to sail for home and assemble a fresh expedition in
Greece, under better auspices, leaving the horse as a placatory gift to Athene. ‘Why was it
built so big?’ asked Priam. Sinon, well coached by Odysseus, replied: ‘To prevent you from
bringing it into the city. Calchas foretells that if you despise this sacred image, Athene will
ruin you; but once it enters Troy, you shall be empowered to marshal all the forces of Asia,
invade Greece, and conquer Mycenae.’
h. ‘These are lies,’ cried Laocoön, ‘and sound as if they were invented by Odysseus.
Do not believe him, Priam!’ He added: ‘Pray, my lord, give me leave to sacrifice a bull to
Poseidon. When I come back I hope to see this wooden horse reduced to ashes.’ It should be
explained that the Trojans, having stoned their priest of Poseidon to death nine years before,
had decided not to replace him until the war seemed to have ended. Now they chose Laocoön
by lot to propitiate Poseidon. He was already the priest of Thymbraean Apollo, whom he had
angered by marrying and begetting children, despite a vow of celibacy and, worse, by lying
with his wife Antiope in sight of the god’s image.
i. Laocoön retired to select a victim and prepare the altar but, in warning of Troy’s
approaching doom, Apollo sent two great sea-serpents, named Porces and Chariboea, or
Curissia, or Periboea, rushing towards Troy from Tenedos and the Calydnian Islands. They
darted ashore and, coiling around the limbs of Laocoön’s twin sons Antiphas and Thymbraeus,
whom some call Melanthus, crushed them to death. Laocoön ran to their rescue, but he too
died miserably. The serpents then glided up to the citadel and while one wound about
Athene’s feet, the other took refuge behind her aegis. Some, however, say that only one of
Laocoön’s sons was killed and that he died in the temple of Thymbraean Apollo, not beside
Poseidon’s altar; and others that Laocoön himself escaped death.
j. This terrible portent served to convince the Trojans that Sinon had spoken the truth.
Priam mistakenly assumed that Laocoön was being punished for hurling his spear at the horse,
rather than for having insulted Apollo. He at once dedicated the horse to Athene and although
Aeneas’s followers retired in alarm to their huts on Mount Ida, nearly all Priam’s Trojans
began to celebrate the victory with banquets and merry-making. The women gathered flowers
from the river banks, garlanded the horse’s mane, and spread a carpet of roses around its
hooves.
k. Meanwhile, inside the horse’s belly, the Greeks had been trembling for terror, and
Epeius wept silently, in an ecstasy of fear. Only Neoptolemus showed no emotion, even when
the point of Laocoön’s spear broke through the timbers close to his head. Time after time he
nudged Odysseus to order the assault—for Odysseus was in command—and clutched his
lance and sword-hilt menacingly. But Odysseus would not consent. In the evening Helen
strolled from the palace and went around the horse three times, patting its flanks and, as if to
amuse Deiphobus who was with her, teased the hidden Greeks by imitating the voice of each
of their wives in turn. Menelaus and Diomedes squatting in the middle of the horse next to
Odysseus, were tempted to leap out when they heard themselves called by name; but he
restrained them and, seeing that Antielus was on the point of answering, clapped hand over
his mouth and, some say, strangled him.
l. That night, exhausted with feasting and revelry, the Trojans slept soundly, and not
even the bark of a dog broke the stillness. But Helen lay awake, and a bright round light
blazed above her chamber as signal to the Greeks. At midnight, just before the full moon
rose—the seventh of the year—Sinon crept from the city to kindle a beacon of Achilles’s
tomb, and Anterior waved a torch. Agamemnon answered these signals by lighting pine-wood
chips in a cresset on the deck of his ship, which was now heaved—to a few bow-shots from
the coast; and the whole fleet drove shorewards. Antenor, cautiously approaching the horse,
reported in a low voice that all was well, and Odysseus ordered Epeius to unlock the trap door.
m. Echion, son of Portheus, leaping out first, fell and broke his neck; the rest
descended by Epeius’s rope-ladder. Some ran to open the gate for the landing party, others cut
down drowsy sentries guarding the citadel and palace; but Menelaus could think only of
Helen, and run straight towards her house.


THE SACK OF TROY

ODYSSEUS, it seems, had promised Hecabe and Helen that all who offered no
resistance should be spared. Yet now the Greeks poured silently through the moonlit streets,
broke into the unguarded houses, and cut the throats of the Trojans as they slept. Hecabe took
refuge with her daughters beneath an ancient laurel-tree at the altar raised to Zeus of the
Courtyard, where she restrained Priam from rushing into the thick of the fight. ‘Remain
among us, my lord,’ she pleaded, ‘in this safe place. You are too old and feeble for battle.’
Priam, grumbling, did as she asked until their son Polites ran by, closely pursued by the
Greeks, and fell transfixed before their eyes. Cursing Neoptolemus, who had delivered the
death blow, Priam hurled an ineffectual spear at him; whereupon he was hustled away from
the altar steps, now red with Polites’s blood, and butchered at the threshold of his own palace.
But Neoptolemus, remembering his filial duty, dragged the body to Achilles’s tomb on the
Sigaean promontory, where he left it to rot, headless and unburied.
b. Meanwhile Odysseus and Menelaus had made for Deiphobus’s house, and there
engaged in the bloodiest of all their combats, emerging victorious only with Athene’s aid.
Which of the two killed Deiphobus is disputed. Some even say that Helen herself plunged a
dagger into his back; and that this action, and the sight of her naked breasts, so weakened the
resolution of Menelaus, who had sworn ‘She must die!’, that he threw away his sword and led
her in safety to the ships. Deiphobus’s corpse was atrociously mangled, but Aeneas later
raised a monument to him on Cape Rhoeteum. Odysseus saw Glaucus, one of Antenor’s sons,
fleeing down a street with a company of Greeks in hot pursuit. He intervened, and at the same
time rescued Glaucus’s brother Helicaon, who had been seriously wounded. Menelaus then
hung a leopard’s skin over the door of Antenor’s house, as a sign that it should be spared.
Anterior, his wife Theano, and his four sons, were allowed to go free, taking all their goods
with them; some days later they sailed away in Menelaus’s ship, and settled first at Cyrene,
next in Thrace, and finally at Henetica on the Adriatic. Henetica was so called because
Antenor took command of certain refugees from Paphlagonian Enete, whose King
Pylaemenes had fallen at Troy, and led them in a successful war against the Euganei of the
Northern Italian plain. The port and district where they disembarked was renamed ‘New
Troy’, and they themselves are now known as Venetians. Antenor is also said to have founded
the city of Padua.
c. According to the Romans, the only other Trojan family spared by the Greeks was
that of Aeneas who, like Anterior, had lately urged the surrender of Helen and the conclusion
of a just peace; Agamemnon, seeing him lift the venerable Anchises upon his shoulders and
carry him towards the Dardanian Gate without a sideways glance, gave orders that so pious a
son should not be molested. Some, however, say that Aeneas was absent in Phrygia when the
city fell. Others, that he defended Troy to the last, then retired to the citadel of Pergamus and,
after a second bold stand, sent his people forward under cover of darkness to Mount Ida,
where he followed them as soon as he might with his family, his treasure, and the sacred
images; and that, being offered honourable terms by the Greeks, he passed over into Thracian
Pellene, and died either there or at Arcadian Orchomenus. But the Romans say that he wandered at last to Latium, founded the city of Lavinium and, falling in battle, was carried up
to Heaven. All these are fables: the truth is that Neoptolemus led him away captive on board
his ship, the most honourable prize won by any of the Greeks, and held him for ransom,
which in due course the Dardanians paid.
d. Helicaon’s wife Laodice (whom some call the wife of Telephus) had lain with
Acamas the Athenian, when he came to Troy in Diomedes’s embassy ten years before, and
secretly borne him a son Munitus, whom Helen’s slave-woman Aethra—mother to Theseus,
and thus the infant’s great-grandmother—had reared for her. At the fall of Troy, as Laodice
stood in the sanctuary of Tros, beside the tombs of Cilla and Munippus, the earth gaped and
swallowed her before the eyes of all.
e. In the confusion, Aethra fled with Munitus to the Greek camp, where Acamas and
Demophon recognized her as their long-lost grandmother, whom they had sworn either to
rescue or to ransom. Demophon at once approached Agamemnon and demanded her
repatriation, with that of her fellow-captive, the sister of Peirithous. Menestheus of Athens
supported their plea, and since Helen had often shown her dislike of Aethra by setting a foot
on her head and tugging at her hair, Agamemnon gave his assent; but obliged Demophon and
Acamas to waive their claims to any other Trojan spoil. Unfortunately, when Acamas landed
in Thrace on his homeward voyage, Munitus, who was accompanying him, died of a serpent’s
bite.
f. No sooner had the massacre begun in Troy than Cassandra fled to the temple of
Athene and clutched the wooden image which had replaced the stolen Palladium. There Little
Ajax found her and tried to drag her away, but she embraced the image so tightly that he had
to take it with him when he carried her off into concubinage; which was the common fate of
all Trojan women. Agamemnon, however, claimed Cassandra as the particular award of his
own valour, and Odysseus obligingly put it about that Ajax had violated Cassandra in the
shrine; which was why the image kept its eyes upturned to Heaven, as if horror-stricken. Thus
Cassandra became Agamemnon’s prize, while Ajax earned the hatred of the whole army; and,
when the Greeks were about to sail, Calchas warned the Council that Athene must be placated
for the insult offered to her priestess. To gratify Agamemnon, Odysseus then proposed the
stoning of Ajax; but he escaped by taking sanctuary at Athene’s altar, where he swore a
solemn oath that Odysseus was lying as usual; nor did Cassandra herself support the charge of
rape. Nevertheless, Calchas’s prophecy could hardly be disregarded; Ajax therefore expressed
sorrow for having forcibly removed the image, and offered to expiate his crime. This he was
prevented from doing by death: the ship in which he sailed home to Greece being wrecked on
the Gyraean Rocks. When he scrambled ashore, Poseidon split the rocks with his trident and
drowned him; or, some say, Athene killed him. Thetis buried his corpse on the island
Myconos, whose inhabitants wore black for a whole year, and now annually launch a black-
sailed ship, heaped with gifts, and burn it in his honour.
g. Athene’s wrath then fell on the land of Opuntian Locris, and the Delphic Oracle
warned Ajax’s former subjects that they would have no relief from famine and pestilence
unless they sent two gifts to Troy every year for a thousand years. Accordingly, the Hundred
Houses of Locris have ever since shouldered this burden in proof of their nobility, they
choose the gifts by lot, and land them at dead of night on the Rhoetean headland, each time
varying the season; with them go kinsmen who know the country and can smuggle them into
the sanctuary of Athene. If the Trojans catch these girls, they are stoned to death, burned as a
defilement to the land, and their ashes scattered on the sea; but once inside the shrine, they are
safe. Their hair is then shorn, they are given the single garment of a slave, and spend their
days in menial temple duties until relieved by another pair. It happened many years ago that
when the Trarians captured Troy and killed a Locrian priestess in the temple itself, the
Locrians decided that their long penance must be over and therefore sent no more gifts; but, famine and pestilence supervening, they hastened to resume their ancient custom, the term of
which is only now drawing to an end. These girls gain Athene’s sanctuary by way of an
underground passage, the secret entrance to which is at some distance from the walls, and
which leads to the muddy culvert used by Odysseus and Diomedes when they stole the
Palladium. The Trojans have no notion how the girls contrive to enter, and never know on
what night the relief is due to arrive, so that they seldom catch them, and then only by
accident.
h. After the massacre, Agamemnon’s people plundered and burned Troy, divided the
spoils, razed the walls, and sacrificed holocausts to their gods. The Council had debated for
awhile what should be done with Hector’s infant son Astyanax, otherwise called Scamandrius;
and when Odysseus recommended the systematic extirpation of Priam’s descendants, Calchas
settled the boy’s fate by prophesying that, if allowed to survive, he would avenge his parents
and his city. Though all other princes shrank from infanticide, Odysseus willingly hurled
Astyanax from the battlements. But some say that Neoptolemus, to whom Hector’s widow
Andromache had fallen as a prize in the division of spoil, snatched Astyanax from her, in
anticipation of the Council’s decree, whirled him around his head by one foot and flung him
upon the rocks far below. And others say that Astyanax leaped to his death from the wall,
while Odysseus was reciting Calchas’s prophecy and invoking the gods to approve the cruel
rite.
i. The Council also debated Polyxena’s fate. As he lay dying, Achilles had begged that
she should be sacrificed upon his tomb, and more recently had appeared in dreams to
Neoptolemus and other chieftains, threatening to keep the fleet windbound at Troy until they
fulfilled his demand. A voice was also heard complaining from the tomb: ‘It is unjust that
none of the spoil has been awarded to me!’ And a ghost appeared on the Rhoetean headland,
clad in golden armour, crying: ‘Whither away, Greeks? Would you leave my tomb
unhonoured?’
j. Calchas now declared that Polyxena must not be denied to Achilles, who loved her.
Agamemnon dissented, arguing that enough blood was already shed, of old men and infants
as well as of warriors, to glut Achilles’s vengeance, and that dead men, however famous,
enjoyed no rights over live women. But Demophon and Acamas, who had been defrauded of
their fair share in the spoils, clamoured that Agamemnon was expressing this view only to
please Polyxena’s sister Cassandra and make her submit more readily to his embraces. They
asked: ‘Which deserves the greater respect, Achilles’s sword or Cassandra’s bed?’ Feeling ran
high and Odysseus, intervening, persuaded Agamemnon to give way.
k. The Council then instructed Odysseus to fetch Polyxena, and invited Neoptolemus
to officiate as priest. She was sacrificed on Achilles’s tomb, in the sight of the whole army,
who hastened to give her honourable burial; whereupon favouring winds sprang up at once.
But some say that the Greek fleet had already reached Thrace when the ghost of Achilles
appeared, threatening them with contrary winds, and that Polyxena was sacrificed there.
Others record that she went of her own free will to Achilles’s tomb, before Troy fell, and
threw herself on the point of a sword, thus expiating the wrong she had done him.
l. Though Achilles had killed Polydorus, Priam’s son by Laothoë, the youngest and
best-loved of his children, yet another prince of the same name survived. He was Priam’s son
by Hecabe and had been sent for safety to the Thracian Chersonese, where his aunt Iliona,
wife of King Polymnestor, reared him. Iliona treated Polydorus as though he were a true
brother to Deiphilus, whom she had borne to Polymnestor. Agamemnon, pursuing Odysseus’s
policy of extirpation, now sent messengers to Polymnestor promising him Electra for a wife
and a dowry of gold if he would do away with Polydorus. Polymnestor accepted the bribe, yet
could not bring himself to harm a child whom he had sworn to protect, and instead killed his
own son Deiphilus in the presence of the messengers, who went back deceived. Polydorus, not knowing the secret of his birth, but realizing that he was the cause of Iliona’s
estrangement from Polymnestor, went to Delphi and asked the Pythoness: ‘What ails my
parents?’ She answered: ‘Is it a small thing that your city is reduced to ashes, your father
butchered and your mother enslaved, that you should come to me with such a question?’ He
returned to Thrace in great anxiety, but found nothing changed since his departure. ‘Can
Apollo have been mistaken?’ he wondered. Iliona told him the truth and, indignant that
Polymnestor should have murdered his only child for gold and the promise of another queen,
he first blinded and then stabbed him.
m. Others say that Polymnestor was threatened by the Greeks with relentless war
unless he would give up Polydorus and that, when he yielded, they brought the boy to their
camp and offered to exchange him for Helen. Since Priam declined to discuss the proposal,
Agamemnon had Polydorus stoned to death beneath the walls of Troy, afterwards sending his
body to Helen with the message: ‘Show Priam this, and ask him whether he regrets his
decision.’ It was an act of wanton spite, because Priam had pledged his word never to
surrender Helen while she remained under Aphrodite’s protection, and was ready to ransom
Polydorus with the rich city of Antandrus.
n. Odysseus won Hecabe as his prize, and took her to the Thracian Chersonese, where
she uttered such hideous invectives against him and the other Greeks, for their barbarity and
breaches of faith, that they found no alternative but to put her to death. Her spirit took the
shape of one of those fearful black bitches that follow Hecate, leaped into the sea and swam
away towards the Hellespont; they called the place of her burial ‘The Bitch’s Tomb’. Another
version of the story is that after the sacrifice of Polyxena, Hecabe found the dead body of
Polydorus washed up on the shore, her son-in-law Polymnestor having murdered him for the
gold with which Priam was defraying the expenses of his education. She summoned
Polymnestor, promising to let him into the secret of a treasure concealed among the ruins of
Troy, and when he approached with his two sons, drew a dagger from her bosom, stabbed the
boys to death and tore out Polymnestor’s eyes; a display of ill-temper which Agamemnon
pardoned because of her age and misfortunes. The Thracian nobles would have taken
vengeance on Hecabe with darts and stones, but she transformed herself into a bitch named
Maera, and ran around howling dismally, so that they retired in confusion.
o. Some say that Antenor founded a new Trojan kingdom upon the ruins of the old one.
Others, that Astyanax survived and became King of Troy after the departure of the Greeks;
and that, when he was expelled by Antenor and his allies, Aeneas put him back on the throne
to which, however, Aeneas’s son Ascanius eventually succeeded, as had been prophesied. Be
that as it may, Troy has never since been more than a shadow of its former self.


THE RETURNS

LET us sail at once,’ said Menelaus, ‘while the breeze holds.’ ‘No, no” replied
Agamemnon, ‘let us first sacrifice to Athene.’ ‘We Greeks owe Athene nothing!’ Menelaus
told him. ‘She defended the Trojan citadel too long.’ The brothers parted on ill terms and
never saw each other again, for whereas Agamemnon, Diomedes, and Nestor enjoyed a
prosperous homeward voyage, Menelaus was caught in a storm sent by Athene; and lost all
but five vessels. These were blown to Crete whence he crossed the sea to Egypt, and spent
eight years in southern waters, unable to return. He visited Cyprus, Phoenicia, Ethiopia, an
Libya, the princes of which received him hospitably and gave him many rich gifts. At last he
came to Pharos, where the nymph Eidothea advised him to capture her prophetic father,
Proteus the sea-god, who alone could tell him how to break the adverse spell and secure
southerly breeze. Menelaus and three companions accordingly disguised themselves in
stinking seal-skins and lay waiting on the shore, until they were joined at midday by hundreds
of seals, Proteus’s flock. Proteus himself then appeared and went to sleep among the seals:
whereupon Menelaus and his party seized him, and though he turned successively into lion,
serpent, panther, boar, running water, and leafy tree, held him fast and forced him to prophesy.
He announced that Agamemnon had been murdered, and that Menelaus must visit Egypt once
more and propitiate the gods with hecatombs. This he duly did, and no sooner had he raised a
cenotaph to Agamemnon, beside the River of Egypt, than the winds blew fair at last. He
arrived at Sparta, accompanied by Helen, on the very day that Orestes avenged Agamemnon’s
murder.
b. A great many ships, though containing no leaders of note, were wrecked on the
Euboean coast, because Nauplius had kindled a beacon on Mount Caphareus to lure his
enemies to their death, as if guiding them into the shelter of the Pagasaean Gulf; but this
crime became known to Zeus, and it was by a false beacon that Nauplius himself met dead-
end many years later.
c. Amphilochus, Calchas, Podaleirius and a few others travelled by land to Colophon,
where Calchas died, as had been prophesied, on meeting a wiser seer than himself—none
other than Mopsus, the son of Apollo and Teiresias’s daughter Manto. A wild fig-tree covered
with fruit grew at Colophon, and Calchas, wishing to abash Mopsus, challenged him as
follows: ‘Can you perhaps tell me, dear colleague, exactly how many figs will be harvested from that tree?’ Mopsus, closing his eyes, as one who trusts to inner sight rather than vulgar
computation, answered:
‘Certainly: first ten thousand figs, then an Aeginetan bushel of figs, carefully
weighed—yes, and a single fig left over.’ Calchas laughed scornfully at the single fig, but
when the tree had been stripped, Mopsus’s intuition proved unerring.
‘To descend from thousands to lesser quantities, deer colleague,’ Mopsus now said,
with an unpleasant smile, ‘how many piglings, would you say, repose in the paunch of that
pregnant sow; and how many of each sex will she farrow; and when?’
‘Eight piglings, all male, and she will farrow them within nine days,’ Calchas
answered at random, hoping to be gone before his guess could be disproved.
‘I am of a different opinion,’ said Mopsus, again closing his eyes. ‘My estimate is
three piglings, only one of them a boar; and the time of their birth will be midday tomorrow,
not a minute earlier or later.’ Mopsus was right once more, and Calchas died of a broken heart.
His comrades buried him at Nothium.
d. The timorous Podaleirius, instead of asking his prophetic friends where he should
settle, preferred to consult the Delphic Pythoness, who advised him irritably to go wherever
he would suffer no harm, even if the skies were to fall. After much thought, he chose a place
in Caria called Syrnos, ringed around with mountains; their summits would, he hoped, catch
and support the blue firmament should Atlas ever let it slip from his shoulders. The Italians
built Podaleirius a hero-shrine on Mount Drium in Daunia, at the summit of which the ghost
of Calchas now maintains a dream oracle.
e. A dispute arose between Mopsus and Amphilochus. They had jointly founded the
city of Mallus in Cilicia, and when Amphilochus retired to his own city of Amphilochian
Argos, Mopsus became sole to reign. Amphilochus, dissatisfied with affairs at Argos, came
back after twelve months to Mallus, expecting to resume his former powers, but Mopsus
gruntly told him to be gone. When the embarrassed Mallians suggested that this dispute
should be decided by single combat, the rivals fought and each killed the other. The funeral
pyres were so divided that Mopsus and Amphilochus could not exchange unseemly scowls
during their cremation, yet the ghosts somehow became so tenderly linked in friendship that
they set up a common oracle; which has now earned a higher reputation for truth even than
Delphic Apollo’s. All questions are written on wax tablets, and the responses given in dreams,
at the remarkably low price of two coppers apiece.
f. Neoptolemus sailed homeward as soon as he had offered sacrifices: to the gods and
to his father’s ghost; and escaped the great tempest which caught Menelaus and Idomeneus,
by taking the prophetic advice of his friend Helenus and running for Molossia. After killing
King Phoenix and marrying his own mother to Helenus, who became king of the Molossians
and founded a new capital city, Neoptolemus regained Iolcus at last. There he succeeded to
the kingdom of his grandfather Peleus, whom the sons of Acastus had expelled; but on
Helenus’s advice did not stay to enjoy it. He burned his ships and marched inland to Lake
Pambrotis in Epirus, near the Oracle of Dodona where he was welcomed by a command of his
distant kinsmen. They were bivouacking under blankets supported by spear-butts, stuck into
the ground. Neoptolemus remembered the words of Helenus: ‘When you find a house with
foundations of iron, wooden walls, and a woollen roof, halt, sacrifice to the gods, build a
city!’ Here he begot two more sons on Andromache, namely Pielus and Pergamus.
g. His end was inglorious. Going to Delphi, he demanded satisfaction for the death of
his father Achilles whom Apollo, disguised as Paris, was said to have shot in his temple at
Troy. When the Pythoness coldly denied him this, he plundered and burned the shrine. Next
he went to Sparta, and claimed that Menelaus had betrothed Hermione to him before Troy;
but that her grandfather Tyndareus had instead given her to Agamemnon’s son Orestes.
Orestes now being pursued by the Erinnyes, and under a divine curse, it was only just, he argued, that Hermione should become his wife. Despite Orestes’s protests, the Spartans
granted his plea, and the marriage took place at Sparta. Hermione, however, proving barren,
Neoptolemus returned to Delphi and, entering the smoke-blackened sanctuary, which Apollo
had decided to rebuild, asked why this should be.
h. He was ordered to offer placatory sacrifices to the god and, while doing so, met
Orestes at the altar. Orestes would have killed him then and there, had not Apollo, foreseeing
that Neoptolemus must die by another hand that very day, prevented it. Now, the flesh of the
sacrifices offered to the god at Delphi has always been a perquisite of the temple servants; but
Neoptolemus, in his ignorance, could not bear to see the fat carcasses of the oxen which he
had slaughtered being hauled away before his eyes, and tried to prevent it by force.
‘Let us be rid of this troublesome son of Achilles!’ said the Pythoness shortly;
whereupon one Machaereus, a Phocian, cut down Neoptolemus with his sacrificial knife.
‘Bury him beneath the threshold of our new sanctuary,’ she commanded. ‘He was a
famous warrior, and his ghost will guard it against all attacks. And if he has truly repented of
his insult to Apollo, let him preside over processions and sacrifices in honour of heroes like
himself.’ But some say that Orestes instigated the murder.
i. Demophon the Athenian touched at Thrace on his return to Athens, and there Phyllis,
a Bisaltian princess, fell in love with him. He married her and became king. When he tired of
Thrace, and decided to resume his travels, Phyllis could do nothing to hold him.
‘I must visit Athens and greet my mother, whom I last saw eleven years ago,’ said
Demophon.
‘You should have thought of that before you accepted the throne,’ Phyllis answered, in
tears. ‘It is not lawful to absent yourself for more than a few months at most.’
Demophon swore by every god in Olympus that he would be back within the year; but Phyllis
knew that he was lying. She accompanied him as far as the port called Enneodos, and there
gave him a casket.
‘This contains a charm,’ Phyllis said. ‘Open it only when you have abandoned all hope
of returning to me.’
j. Demophon had no intention of going to Athens. He steered a south-easterly course
for Cyprus, where he settled; and when the year was done, Phyllis cursed him in Mother
Rhea’s name, took poison, and died. At that very hour, curiosity prompted Demophon to open
the casket, and the sight of its contents—who knows what they were—made a lunatic of him.
He leaped on his horse and galloped off in panic, belabouring its head with the flat of his
sword until it stumbled and fell. The sword flew from his hand, stuck point upwards in the
ground, and transfixed him as he was flung over the horse’s head. A story is told of another
Thracian princess named Phyllis, who had fallen in love with Demophon’s brother Acamas
and, when storms, delayed his return from Troy, died of sorrow and was metamorphosed into
an almond-tree. These two princesses have often been confused.
k. Diomedes, like Agamemnon and others, experienced Aphrodite’s bitter enmity. He
was first wrecked on the Lycian coast, where King Lycus would have sacrificed him to Ares,
had not the princess Callirrhoë helped him to escape; and, on reaching Argos, found that his
wife Aegialeia had been persuaded by Nauplius to live in adultery with Cometes or, some say,
with Hippolytus. Retiring to Corinth, he learned there that his grandfather Oeneus needed
assistance against certain rebels; so he sailed for Aetolia and set him firmly on his throne
again. But some say that Diomedes had been forced to leave Argos long before the Trojan
War, on his return from the Epigoni’s successful Theban campaign; and that Agamemnon had
since assisted him to win back his kingdom. He spent the remainder of his life in Italian
Daunia, where he married Euippe, daughter of King Daunus; and built many famous cities,
including Brundisium, which may have been why Daunus jealously murdered him when he
was an old man, and buried him in one of the islands now called the Diomedans. According to another account, however, he suddenly disappeared by an act of divine magic, and his
comrades turned into gentle and virtuous birds, which still nest on those islands. Diomedes’s
golden armour has been preserved by the priests of Athene at Apulian Luceria, and he is
worshipped as a god in Venetia, and throughout Southern Italy.
l. Nauplius had also persuaded Idomeneus’s wife Meda to be faithless. She took one
Leucus for her lover, but he soon drove her and Idomeneus’s daughter Cleisithyra from the
palace and murdered them both in the temple where they had taken sanctuary. Leucus then
seduced ten cities from allegiance to their rightful king, and usurped the throne. Caught in a
storm as he sailed for Crete, Idomeneus vowed to dedicate to Poseidon the first person whom
he met; and this happened to be his own son or, some say, another of his daughters. He was
on the point of fulfilling his vow when a pestilence visited the country and interrupted the
sacrifice. Leucus now had a good excuse for banishing Idomeneus, who emigrated to the
Sallentine region of Calabria, and lived there until his death.
m. Few of the other Greeks reached home again, and those who did found only trouble
awaiting them. Philoctetes was expelled by rebels from his city of Meliboea in Thessaly, and
fled to Southern Italy, where he founded Petelia, and Crimissa near Croton, and sent some of
his followers to help Aegestes fortify Sicilian Aegesta. He dedicated his famous bow at
Crimissa, in the sanctuary of Distraught Apollo, and when he died was buried beside the river
Sybaris.
n. Contrary winds forced Guneus to the Cynips river in Libya, and he made his home
there. Pheidippus with his Coans went first to Andros and thence to Cyprus, where Agapenor
had also settled. Menestheus did not resume his reign at Athens, but accepted the vacant
kingship of Melos; some say, however, that he died at Troy. Elpenor’s followers were
wrecked on the shores of Epirus, and occupied Apollonia; those of Protesilius, near Pellene in
the Thracian Chersonese; and Tlepolemus’s Rhodians, on one of the Iberian islands, whence a
party of them sailed westward again to Italy and were helped by Philoctetes in their war
against the barbarous Lucanians. The tale of Odysseus’s wanderings is now Homeric
entertainment for twenty-four nights.
o. Only Nestor, who had always shown himself just, prudent, generous, courteous, and
respectful to the gods, returned safe and sound to Pylus, where he enjoyed a happy old age,
untroubled by wars, and surrounded by bold, intelligent sons. For so Almighty Zeus decreed.


ODYSSEUS'S WANDERINGS

ODYSSEUS, setting sail from Troy in the sure knowledge that he must wander for
another ten years before he could hope to regain Ithaca, touched first at Ciconian Ismarus and
took it by storm. In the pillage he spared only Maro, Apollo’s priest, who gratefully presented
him with several jars of sweet wine; but the Ciconians of the interior saw the pall of smoke
spread high above the burned city, and charging down on the Greeks as they drank by the
seashore, scattered them in all directions. When Odysseus had rallied and re-embarked his
men with heavy losses, a fierce north-easterly gale drove him across the Aegean Sea towards
Cythera. On the fourth day, during a tempting lull, he tried to double Cape Malea and work up
northward to Ithaca, but the wind rose again more violently than before. After nine days of
danger and misery, the Libyan promontory where the Lotus-eaters live hove in sight. Now,
the lotus is a stoneless, saffron-coloured fruit about the size of a bean, growing in sweet and
wholesome clusters, though with the property of making those who have tasted it lose all
memory of their own land; some travellers, however, describe it as a kind of apple from
which a heavy cider is brewed. Odysseus landed to draw water, and sent out a patrol of three
men, who ate the lotus offered them by the natives and so forgot their mission. After a while
he went in search of them at the head of a rescue party, and though himself tempted to taste
the lotus, refrained. He brought the deserters back by force, clapped them in irons, and sailed
away without more ado.
b. Next he came to a fertile, well-wooded island, inhabited only by cottadoss wild
goats, and shot some of these for food. There he beached the whole fleet, except a single ship
in which he set out to explore the opposite coast. It proved to be the land of the fierce and
barbarous Cyclopes, so called because of the large, round eye that glared from the centre of
each forehead. They have lost the art of smith craft known to their ancestors who worked for
Zeus, and are now shepherds without laws, assemblies, ships, markets, or knowledge of
agriculture; living sullenly apart from one another, in caverns hollowed from the rocky hills.
Seeing the high, laurel-hung entrance of such a cavern, beyond a stock-yard walled with huge
stones, Odysseus and his companions entered, unaware that the property belonged to a
Cyclops named Polyphemus, a gigantic son of Poseidon and the nymph Thoösa, who loved to
dine off human flesh. The Greeks made themselves at home by lighting a large fire; then
slaughtered and roasted some kids that they found penned at the back of the cavern, helped
themselves to cheese from baskets hung on the walls, and feasted cheerfully. Towards
evening Polyphemus appeared. He drove his flock into the cavern and closed the entrance
behind him with a slab of stone so huge that twenty teams of oxen could scarcely have stirred
it; then, not observing that he had guests, sat down to milk his ewes and goats. Finally he
glanced up from the pail and saw Odysseus and his comrades reclined around the hearth. He
asked gruffly what business they had in his cavern. Odysseus replied: ‘Gentle monster, we are
Greeks on our way home after the sack of Troy; pray remember your duty to the gods and
entertain us hospitably.’ For answer Polyphemus snorted, seized two sailors by the feet,
dashed out their brains on the floor, and devoured the carcasses raw, growling over the bones
like any mountain lion.
c. Odysseus would have taken bloody vengeance before dawn, but dared not, because
Polyphemus alone was strong enough to shift the stone from the entrance. He passed the night,
head clasped between hands, elaborating a plan of escape, while Polyphemus snored
dreadfully. For breakfast, the monster brained and killed another two sailors, after which he
silently drove out his flock before him and closed cavern with the same slab of stone; but
Odysseus took a stake of grey olive-wood, sharpened and hardened one end in the fire, then
concealed it under a heap of dung. That evening the Cyclops returned and ate two more of the twelve sailors, whereupon Odysseus politely offered him an ivy-wood bowl of the heady wine
given him by Maro in Ciconian Ismarus; fortunately, he had brought a full wine-skin ashore.
Polyphemus drank greedily, called for a second bowlful, never in his life having tasted any
drink stronger than buttermilk, and condescended to ask Odysseus his name. ‘My name is
Oudeis,’ Odysseus replied, ‘or that is what everyone calls me, for short’. Now, Oudeis means
‘Nobody’. ‘I will eat you last, friend Oudeis,’ Polyphemus promised.
d. As soon as the Cyclops had fallen into a drunken sleep, the wine having been
untempered with water, Odysseus and his remaining companions heated the stake in the
embers of the fire, then drove it into the single eye and twisted it about, Odysseus bearing
down heavily from above, as one drills a bolt hole in ship’s timber. The eye hissed,
Polyphemus raised a horrible yell, which set all his neighbours hurrying from near and far to
learn what was amiss.
‘I am blinded and in frightful agony! It is the fault of Oudeis,’ he bellowed. ‘Oudeis is
to blame!’
‘Poor wretch’ they replied. ‘If, as you say, nobody is to blame, must be in a delirious
fever. Pray to our Father Poseidon for recovery, and stop making so much noise!’
They went off grumbling, and Polyphemus felt his way to the cavern mouth, removed the slab
of stone and, groping expectantly with his hands, waited to catch the surviving Greeks as they
tried to escape. But Odysseus took withies and tied each of his comrades in turn under the
belly of a ram, the middle one of three, distributing the weight evenly. He himself chose an
enormous tup, the leader of the flock, and prepared to curl up underneath it, gripping the
fleece with his fingers and toes.
e. At dawn, Polyphemus let his flock out to pasture, gently stroking their backs to
make sure that no one was astride of them. He lingered awhile talking sorrowfully to the beast
under which Odysseus lay concealed, asking it: ‘Why, dear ram, are you not to the fore, as
usual? Do you pity me in my misfortune?’ But at last he allowed it to pass.
f. Thus Odysseus contrived both to free his companions and to drive a flock of fat
rams down to the ship. Quickly she was launched, and as the men seized their oars and began
to row off, Odysseus could not refrain from shouting an ironical goodbye. For answer,
Polyphemus hurled a large rock, which fell half a length ahead of the ship; its backwash
nearly fetched her ashore again. Odysseus laughed, and cried: ‘Should anyone ask who
blinded you, answer that it was not Oudeis, but Odysseus of Ithaca!’ The enraged Cyclops
prayed aloud to Poseidon: ‘Grant, father, that if my enemy Odysseus ever returns home, he
may arrive late, in evil plight, from a foreign ship, having lost all his comrades; may he also
find a heap of troubles massed on the threshold!’ He hurled another, even larger, rock and this
time it fell half length astern of the ship; so that the wave which it raised carried her swiftly to
the island where Odysseus’s other followers were anxiously awaiting him. But Poseidon
listened to Polyphemus, and promised the required vengeance.
g. Odysseus now steered to the north, and presently reached the Isle of Aeolus,
Warden of the Winds, who entertained him nobly for an entire month and, on the last day,
handed him a bag of winds, explaining that while its neck was secured with silver wire, all
would be well. He had not, he said, imprisoned the gentle West Wind, which would waft the
fleet steadily over the Ionian Sea towards Ithaca, but Odysseus might release the others one
by one, if for any reason he needed to alter his course. Smoke could already be descried rising
from the chimneys of Odysseus’s palace, when he fell asleep, overcome by exhaustion. His
men, who had been watching for this moment, untied the bag, which promised to contain
wine. At once the Winds roared homeward, driving the ship before them; and Odysseus soon
found himself on Aeolus’s island again. With profuse apologies he asked for further help, but
was told to be gone and use oars this time; not a breath of West Wind should he be given. ‘I
cannot assist a man whom the gods oppose,’ cried Aeolus, slamming the door in his face.
h. After a seven days’ voyage, Odysseus came to the land of the Laestrygones, ruled
over by King Lamus, which is said by some to have lain in the north-western part of Sicily.
Others place it near Formiae in Italy, where the noble House of Lamia claims descent from
King Lamus; and this seems credible, because who would admit descent from cannibals,
unless it were a matter of common tradition? In the land of the Laestrygones, night and
morning come so close together that shepherds leading home their flocks at sunset hail those
who drive theirs out at dawn. Odysseus’s captains boldly entered the harbour of Telepylus
which, except for a narrow entrance, is ringed by abrupt cliffs, and beached their ships near a
cart track that wound up a valley, Odysseus himself, being more cautious, made his ship fast
to a rock outside the harbour, after sending three scouts inland to reconnoitre. They followed
the track until they found a girl drawing water from a spring. She proved to be a daughter of
Antiphates, a Laestrygonian chieftain, to whose house she led them. There, however, they
were mercilessly set upon by a horde of savages who seized one of them and killed him for
the pot; the other two ran off at full speed, but the savages, instead of pursuing them, made for
the chiffons and stove in the ships with a cascade of boulders before they could be launched.
Then, descending to the beach, they massacred and devoured the crew at their leisure.
Odysseus escaped by cutting the hawser of his ship a sword, and calling on his comrades to
row for dear life.
i. He steered his sole remaining vessel due east and, after a long voyage, reached
Aeaea, the Island of Dawn, ruled over by the goddess Circe, daughter of Helius and Perse,
and thus sister to Aeëtes, the baleful king of Colchis. Circe was skilled in all enchantments,
but had little love for human-kind. When lots were cast to decide who should stay to guard the
ship and who should reconnoitre the island, Odysseus’s mate Eurylochus was chosen to go
ashore with twenty-two others. He found Aeaea rich in oaks and other forest trees, and at last
came upon Circe’s palace, built in a wide clearing towards the centre of the island. Wolves
and lions prowled around but, instead of attacking Eurylochus and his party, stood upright on
their hind legs and caressed them. One might have taken these beasts for human beings, and
so indeed they were, though thus transformed by Circe’s spells.
j. Circe sat in her hall, singing to her loom and, when Eurylochus’s party raised a
halloo, stepped out with a smile and invited them to dine at her table. All entered gladly,
except Eurylochus himself who, suspecting a trap, stayed behind and peered anxiously in at
the windows. The goddess set a mess of cheese, barley, honey, and wine before the hungry
sailors; but it was drugged, and no sooner had they begun to eat than she struck their
shoulders with her wand and transformed them into hogs. Grimly then she opened the wicket
of a stable, scattered a few handfuls of acorns and cornel-cherries on the floor, and left them
there to wallow.
k. Eurylochus came back, weeping, and reported this misfortune to Odysseus, who
seized his sword and went off, bent on rescue, though without any settled plan in his head. To
his surprise he encountered the god Hermes, who greeted him politely and offered him a
charm against Circe’s magic: a scented white flower with a black root, called moly, which
only the gods can recognize and cull. Odysseus accepted the gift gratefully and, continuing on
his way, was in due course entertained by Circe. When he had eaten his drugged meal, she
raised her wand and struck him on the shoulder. ‘Go join your comrades in the stable’ she
commanded. But having surreptitiously smelt the moly flower, he remained unenchanted, and
leaped up, sword in hand. Circe fell weeping at his feet. ‘Spare me,’ she cried, ‘and you shall
share my couch and reign in Aeaea with me!’ Well aware that witches have power to enervate
and destroy their lovers, by secretly drawing off their blood in little bladders, Odysseus
exacted a solemn oath from Circe not to plot any further mischief against him. This oath she
swore by the blessed gods and, after giving him a deliciously warm bath, wine in golden cups,
and a tasty supper served by a staid housekeeper, prepared to pass the night with him in a purple-covered bed. Yet Odysseus would not respond to her amorous advances until she
consented to free not only his comrades but all the other sailors enchanted by her. Once this
was done, he gladly stayed in Aeaea until she had borne him three sons, Agrius, Latinus, and
Telegonus.
l. Odysseus longed to be on his way again, and Circe consented to let him go. But he
must first visit Tartarus, and there seek out Teiresias the seer, who would prophesy the fate
prepared for him in Ithaca, should he ever reach it, and afterwards. ‘Run before the North
Wind,’ Circe said, ‘until you come to the Ocean Stream and the Grove of Persephone,
remarkable for its black poplars and aged willows. At the point where the rivers Phlegethon
and Cocytus flow into the Acheron, dig a trench, and sacrifice a young ram and a black ewe—
which I myself will provide—to Hades and Persephone. Let the blood enter the trench, and as
you wait for Teiresias to arrive drive off all other ghosts with your sword. Allow him to drink
as much as he pleases and then listen carefully to his advice.’
m. Odysseus forced his men aboard, unwilling though they were to sail from pleasant
Aeaea to the land of Hades. Circe supplied a favourable breeze, which wafted them swiftly to
the Ocean Stream and those lost frontiers of the world where the fog-bound Cimmerians,
citizens of Perpetual Dusk, are denied all view of the Sun. When they sighted Persephone’s
Grove, Odysseus landed, and did exactly as Circe advised him. The first ghost to appear at the
trench was that of Elpenor, one of his own crew who, only a few days previously, had
drunken himself to sleep on the roof of Circe’s palace, awoken in a daze, toppled over the
edge, and killed himself. Odysseus, having left Aeaea so hurriedly that Elpenor’s absence had
escaped his notice until too late, now promised him decent burial. ‘To think that you came
here on foot quicker than I have come by ship!’ he exclaimed. But he denied Elpenor the least
sip of the blood, however piteously he might plead.
n. A mixed crowd of ghosts swarmed about the trench, men and women of all dates
and every age, including Odysseus’s mother Anticleia; but he would not let even her drink
before Teiresias had done so. At last Teiresias appeared, lapped the blood gratefully, and
wanted Odysseus to keep his men under strict control once they had sighted Sicily, their next
landfall, lest they be tempted to steal the cattle of the Sun Titan Hyperion. He must expect
great trouble in Ithaca, and though he could hope to avenge himself on the scoundrels who
were devouring his substance there, his travels would not yet have finished. He must take an
oar and carry it on his shoulder until he came to an inland region where no man salted his
meat, and where the oar would be mistaken for a winnowing-bat. If he then sacrificed to
Poseidon, he might regain Ithaca and enjoy a prosperous old age; but in the end death would
come to him from the sea.
o. Having thanked Teiresias and promised him the blood of another black ewe on his
return to Ithaca, Odysseus at last permitted his mother to quench her thirst. She gave him
further news from home, but kept a discreet silence about her daughter-in-law’s suitors. When
she had said goodbye, the ghosts of numerous queens and princesses trooped up to lap the
blood. Odysseus was delighted to meet such well-known personages as Antiope, Iocaste,
Chloris, Pero, Leda, Iphimedeia, Phaedra, Procris, Ariadne, Maera, Clymene, and Eriphyle.
p. He next entertained a troop of former comrades: Agamemnon, who advised him to
land on Ithaca in secret; Achilles, whom he cheered by reporting Neoptolemus’s mighty feats;
and Great Ajax, who had by no means yet forgiven him and strode sulkily away. Odysseus
also saw Minos judging, Orion hunting, Tantalus and Sisyphus suffering, and Heracles—or
rather his wraith, for Heracles himself banquets at ease among the immortal gods—who
commiserated with him on his long hours.
q. Odysseus sailed back safely to Aeaea, where he buried the body of Elpenor and
planted his oar on the barrow as a memorial. Circe greeted him merrily. ‘What hardihood to
have visited the land of Hades!’ she cried. ‘One death is enough for most men; but now you will have had two!’ She warned him that he must next pass the Island of the Sirens, whose
beautiful voices enchanted all who sailed near. These children of Achelous or, some say,
Phorcys, by either the Muse Terpsichore, or by Sterope, Porthaon’s daughter, had girls’ faces
but birds’ feet and feathers, and many different stories are told to account for this peculiarity:
such as that they had been playing with Core when Hades abducted her, and that Demeter,
vexed because they had not come to her aid, gave them wings, saying: ‘Begone, and search
for my daughter all over the world!’ Or that Aphrodite turned them into birds because, for
pride, they would not yield their maidenheads either to gods or men. They no longer had the
power of flight, however, since the Muses had defeated them in a musical contest and pulled
out their wing feathers to make themselves crowns. Now they sat and sang in a meadow
among the heaped bones of sailors whom they had drawn to their death. ‘Plug your men’s
ears with bees-wax,’ advised Circe, ‘and if you are eager to hear their music, have your crew
bind you hand and foot to the mast, and make them swear not to let you escape, however
harshly you may threaten them.’ Circe warned Odysseus of other perils in store for him, when
he came to say goodbye; and he sailed off, once more conveyed by a fair breeze.
r. After ship approached Siren Land, Odysseus took Circe’s advice, and the Sirens
sang so sweetly, promising him foreknowledge of all future happenings on earth, that he
shouted to his companions, threatening them with death if they would not release him; but,
obeying his earlier orders, they only lashed him tighter to the mast. Thus the ship sailed by in
safety, and the Sirens committed suicide for vexation.
s. Some believe that there were only two Sirens; others, that there were three, namely
Parthenope, Leucosia, and Ligeia; or Peisinoë, Aglaope, and Thelxepeia; or Aglaophonos,
Thelxiope, and Molpe. Still others name four: Teles, Raidne, Thelxiope, and Molpe.
t. Odysseus’s next danger lay in passing between two cliffs, one of which harboured
Scylla, and the other Charybdis, her fellow-monster. Charybdis, daughter of Mother Earth and
Poseidon, was a voracious woman, who had been hurled by Zeus’s thunderbolt into the sea
and now, thrice daily, sucked in a huge volume of water and presently spewed it out again.
Scylla, the once beautiful daughter of Hecate Crataeis by Phorcys, or Phorbas—or of Echidne
by Typhon, Triton, or Tyrrhenius—had been changed into a dog-like monster with six fearful
heads and twelve feet. This was done either by Circe when jealous of the sea-god Glaucus’s
love for her, or by Amphitrite, similarly jealous of Poseidon’s love. She would seize sailors,
crack their bones, and slowly swallow them. Almost the strangest thing about Scylla was her
yelp: no louder than the whimper of a newly-born puppy. Trying to escape from Charybdis,
Odysseus steered a trifle too near Scylla who, leaning over the gun-wales, snatched six of his
ablest sailors off the deck, one in each mouth, and whisked them away to the rocks, where she
devoured them at leisure. They screamed and stretched out their hands to Odysseus, but he
dared not attempt a rescue, and sailed on.
u. Odysseus took this course in order to avoid the Wandering, or Clashing, Rocks,
between which only the Argo had ever succeeded in passing; he was unaware that they were
now rooted to the sea-bed. Soon he sighted Sicily, where Hyperion the Sun-Titan, whom
some call Helius, had seven herds of splendid cattle at pasture, fifty to a herd, and large flocks
of sturdy sheep as well. Odysseus made his men swear a solemn oath to be content with the
provisions which Circe had supplied, and not steal a single cow. They then landed and
beached the ship, but the South Wind blew for thirty days, food grew scarce, and though the
sailors hunted or fished every day, they had little success. At last Eurylochus, desperate with
hunger, drew his comrades aside and persuaded them to slaughter some of the cattle—in
compensation for which, he hastened to add, they would build Hyperion a splendid temple on
their return to Ithaca. They waited until Odysseus had fallen asleep, caught several cows,
slaughtered them, sacrificed the thighbones and fat to the gods, and roasted enough good beef
for a six days’ feast.
v. Odysseus was horrified when he awoke to find what had happened; and so was
Hyperion on hearing the story from Lampetia, his daughter and chief herdswoman. Hyperion
complained to Zeus who, seeing that Odysseus’s ship had been launched again, sent a sudden
westerly storm to bring the mast crashing down on the helmsman’s skull; and then flung a
thunderbolt on deck. The ship foundered, and all aboard were drowned, except Odysseus. He
contrived to lash the floating mast and keel together with the raw-hide back-stay, and damper
astride this makeshift vessel. But a southerly gale sprang up, and he found himself sucked
towards Charybdis’s whirlpool. Clutching at the bole of a wild fig-tree which grew from the
cliff above, he hung on grimly until the mast and keel had been swallowed and regurgitated;
then mounted them once more and paddled away with his hands. After nine days he drifted
ashore on the island of Ogygia, where lived Calypso, the daughter of Thetis by Oceanus, or it
may have been Nereus, or Atlas.
w. Thickets of alder, black poplar, and cypress, with horned owls, falcons, and
garrulous sea-crows roosting in their branches, sheltered Calypso’s great cavern. A grape-vine
twisted across the entrance. Parsley and irises grew thick in an adjoining meadow, which was
fed by four clear streams. Here lovely Calypso welcomed Odysseus as he stumbled ashore,
and offered him plentiful food, heady drink, and a share of her soft bed. ‘If you stay with me,’
she pleaded, ‘you shall enjoy immortality and ageless youth.’ Some say that it was Calypso,
not Circe, who bore him Latinus, besides the twins Nausithous and Nausinous.
x. Calypso detained Odysseus on Ogygia for seven years—or perhaps only for five—
and tried to make him forget Ithaca; but he had soon tired of her embraces, and used to sit
despondently on the shore, staring out to sea. At last, taking advantage of Poseidon’s absence,
Zeus sent Hermes to Calypso with an order for Odysseus’s release. She had no option but to
obey, and therefore told him to build a raft, which she would victual sufficiently: providing a
sack of corn, skins of wine and water, and dried meat. Though Odysseus suspected a trap,
Calypso swore by the Styx that she would not deceive him, and lent him axe, augers, and all
other necessary gear. He needed no urging, but improxed a raft from a score of tree-trunks
lashed together; launched it on rollers; kissed Calypso goodbye, and set sail with a gentle
breeze.
y. Poseidon had been visiting his blameless friends the Ethiopians, and as he drove
home across the sea in his winged chariot, suddenly saw the raft. At once Odysseus was swept
overboard by a huge wave, and the rich robes which he wore dragged him down to the sea-
depths until his lungs seemed about to burst. Yet being a powerful swimmer, he managed to
divest himself of the robes, regain the surface, and scrollable back on the raft. The pitiful
goddess Leucothea, formerly Ino, wife of Athamas, alighted beside him there, disguised as a
sea-mew. In her beak she carried a veil, which she told Odysseus to wind around his middle
before plunging into the sea again. This veil would save him, she promised. He hesitated to
obey but, when another wave shattered the raft, wound the veil around him and swam off.
Since Poseidon had now returned to his underwater palace near Euboea, Athene dared send a
wind to flatten the waves in Odysseus’s path, and two days later he was cast ashore, utterly
exhausted, on the island of Drepane then occupied by the Phaeacians. He lay down in the
shelter of a copse beside a stream, heaped dry leaves over himself, and fell fast asleep.
z. Next morning the lovely Nausicaa, daughter of King Alcinous and Queen Arëte, the
royal pair who had once shown such kindness to Jason and Medea, came to wash her linen in
the stream. When the work was done she played at ball with her women. Their ball happened
to bounce into the water, a shout of dismay rang out, and Odysseus awoke in alarm. He had
no clothes, but used a leafy olive-branch to conceal his nakedness and, creeping forward,
addressed such honeyed words to Nausicaa that she discreetly took him under her protection
and had him brought to the palace. There Alcinous heaped gifts on Odysseus and, after
listening to his adventures, sent him off to Ithaca in a free ship. His escort knew the island well. They cast anchor in the haven of Phorcys, but decided not to disturb his sound sleep,
carried him ashore and laid him gently on the sand, stacking Alcinous’s gifts beneath a tree
not far off. Poseidon, however, was so vexed by the Phaeacians’ kindness to Odysseus that he
struck the ship with the fiat of his hand as she sailed home, and turned her into stone, crew
and all. Alcinous at once sacrificed twelve choice bulls to Poseidon, who was now threatening
to deprive the city of its two harbours by dropping a great mountain between; and some say
that he was as good as his word. ‘This will teach us not to be hospitable in future!’ Alcinous
told Arëte in bitter tones.


ODYSSEUS'S HOMECOMING

WHEN Odysseus awoke he did not at first recognize his native island, over which
Athene had cast a distorting glamour. Presently she came by, disguised as a shepherd boy, and
listened to his long, lying tale of how he was a Cretan who, after killing Idomeneus’s son, had
fled northward in a Sidonian ship, and been put ashore here against his will. ‘What island is
this?’ he asked. Athene laughed and caressed Odysseus’s cheek: ‘A wonderful liar you are,
indeed!’ she said. ‘But for knowing the truth I might easily have been deceived. What
surprises me, though, is that you did not penetrate my disguise. I am Athene; the Phaeacians
landed you here at my instructions. I regret having taken so many years to fetch you home;
but I did not dare offend my uncle Poseidon by supporting you too openly.’ She helped him to
stow away his Phaeacian cauldrons, tripods, purple cloaks and golden cups in the shelter of a
cave, and then transformed him beyond recognition—withered his skin, thinned and whitened
his red locks, clothed him in filthy rags, and directed him to the hut of Eumaeus, the faithful
old palace swineherd. Athene was just back from Sparta, where Telemachus had gone to ask
Menelaus, recently returned from Egypt, whether he could supply any news of Odysseus.
Now, it should be explained that, presuming Odysseus’s death, no less than one hundred and twelve insolent young princes of the islands which formed the kingdom—Dulichium, Samos,
Zacynthus, and Ithaca itself—were courting his wife Penelope, each hoping to marry her and
take the throne; and had agreed among themselves to kill Telemachus on his return from
Sparta.
b. When they first asked Penelope to decide between them, she declared that Odysseus
must certainly still be alive, since his home-coming had been foretold by a reliable oracle; and
later, hard-pressed, promised a decision as which she must weave against the death of old
Laertes, father-in-law. But she took three years over the task, weaving it by day and
unravelling it by night, until at last the suitors detected the ruse. All the time they were
disporting themselves in Odysseus’s palace, drinking his wine, slaughtering his pigs, sheep,
and cattle, and seducing maid-servants.
c. To Eumaeus, who received Odysseus kindly, he gave another false account of
himself, though declaring on oath that Odysseus was alive and on the way home. Telemachus
now landed unexpectedly, evading the suitors’ plots to murder him, and came straight to
Eumaeus’s hut; Athene had sent him back in haste from Sparta. Odysseus however, did not
disclose his identity until Athene has permitted it and magically restored him to his true
appearance. A touching scene of recognition between father and son followed. But Eumaeus
had not yet been taken into the secret, nor was Telemachus allowed to enlighten Penelope.
d. Once more disguised as a beggar, Odysseus went to spy upon the suitors. On the
way he encountered his goat-herd Melantheus, who railed indecently at him and kicked him
on the hip; yet Odysseus refrained from immediate vengeance. When he reached the palace
court, he found old Argus, once a famous hunting hound, stretched a dunghill, mangy,
decrepit, and tormented by fleas. Argus wagged his raw stump of a tail and drooped his
tattered ears in recognition of Odysseus, who covertly brushed away a tear as Argus expired.
e. Eumaeus led Odysseus into the banqueting hall, where Telemachus, pretending not
to know who he was, offered him hospitality. Athene then appeared, though inaudible and
invisible to all but Odysseus, and suggested that he should make a round of the hall scraps
from the suitors, and thus learn what sort of men they were. This he did, and found them no
less niggardly than rapacious. The most shameless of the entire company, Antinous of Ithaca
(to whom he told a wholly different tale of his adventures) angrily threw a footstool at him.
Odysseus, nursing a bruised shoulder, appealed to the other suitors, who agreed that Antinous
should have shown more courtesy; and Penelope, when her maids reported the incident, was
scandalized. She sent for the supposed beggar, hoping to have news from him of her lost
husband. Odysseus promised to visit the royal parlour that evening, and tell her whatever she
wished to know.
f. Meanwhile, a sturdy Ithacan beggar, nicknamed ‘Irus’ because, like the goddess Iris,
he was at everyone’s beck and call, tried to chase Odysseus from the porch. When he would
not stir, Irus challenged him to a boxing match, and Antinous, laughing heartily, offered the
winner a goat’s haggis and a seat at the suitors’ mess. Odysseus hoisted his rags, tucked them
under the frayed belt which he was wearing, and squared up to Irus. The ruffian shrank away
at sight of his bulging muscles, but was kept from precipitate flight by the taunts of the suitors;
then Odysseus felled him with a single blow, taking care not to attract too much notice by
making it a mortal one. The suitors applauded, sneered, quarrelled, settled to their afternoon’s
feasting, toasted Penelope, who now came to extract bridal gifts from them all (though with
no intention of making a definite choice), and at nightfall dispersed to their various lodgings.
g. Odysseus instructed Telemachus to take down the spears which hung on the walls
of the banqueting hall and store them in the armoury, while he went to visit Penelope. She did
not know him, and he spun her a long, circumstantial yarn, describing a recent encounter with
Odysseus; who had, he said, gone to consult Zeus’s Oracle at Dodona, but should soon be
back in Ithaca. Penelope listened attentively, and ordered Eurycleia, Odysseus’s aged nurse, to give him a foot-bath. Eurycleia presently recognized the scar on his thigh, and cried out in
joy and surprise; so he gripped her withered throat and hissed for silence. Penelope missed the
incident; Athene had distracted her attention.
h. On the following day, at another banquet; Agelaus of Samos, one of the suitors,
asked Telemachus whether he could not persuade his mother to make up her mind. Penelope
thereupon announced that she was ready to accept any suitor who would emulate Odysseus’s
feat of shooting an arrow through twelve axe-rings; the axes to be set in a straight row with
their butts planted in a trench. She showed them the bow which they must use: one given to
Odysseus by Iphitus, twenty-five years ago, when he went to protest at Messene against the
theft from Ithaca of three hundred sheep and their shepherds. It once belonged to Eurytus, the
father of Iphitus, whom Apollo himself had instructed in archery, but whom Heracles outshot
and killed. Some of the suitors now tried to string the powerful weapon, and were unable to
bend it, even after softening the wood with tallow; it was therefore decided to postpone the
trial until the next day. Telemachus, who came nearest to accomplishing the feat, laid down
the bow again at a warning sign from Odysseus. Then Odysseus, despite protests and vulgar
insults—in the course of which Telemachus was forced to order Penelope back to her room—
seized the bow, strung it easily, and twanged the strung melodiously for all to hear. Taking
careful aim he shot an arrow through every one of the twelve axe-rings. Meanwhile
Telemachus, who had hurriedly slipped out, re-entered with sword and spear, and Odysseus
declared himself at last by shooting Antinous in the throat.
i. The suitors sprang up and rushed to the walls, only to find that the spears were no
longer in their usual places. Eurymachus begged for mercy, and when Odysseus refused it,
drew sword and lunged at him, whereupon an arrow transfixed his liver and he fell dying. A
fierce fight ensued between the desperate suitors armed with swords, and Odysseus, unarmed
except for the bow but posted before the main entrance to the hall. Telemachus ran back to the
armoury, and brought shields, spears and helmets to arm his father and Eumaeus and
Philoetius, the two faithful servants who were standing by him; for though Odysseus had shot
down the suitors in heaps, his stock of arrows was nearly expended. Melantheus, stealing off
by a side door to fetch weapons for the suitors, was caught and trussed up on his second visit
to the armour, before he had succeeded in arming more than a few of them. The slaughter then
continued, and Athene in the guise of a swallow flew twittering around the hall until every
one of the suitors and their supporters lay dead, except only Medon the herald, and Phemius
the bard; these Odysseus spared, because they had not actively wronged him, and because
their persons were sacrosanct. He now paused to ask Eurycleia, who had locked the palace
women in their quarters, how many of these had remained true to his cause. She answered:
‘Only twelve have disgraced themselves, my lord.’ The guilty maid-servants were summoned
and set to cleanse the hall of blood with sponges and water; when they had done, Odysseus
hanged them in a row. They kicked a little, but soon all was over. Afterwards, Eumaeus and
Philoetius docked Melantheus of his extremities—nose, ears, hands, and genitals, which were
cast to the dogs.
j. Odysseus, at last reunited with Penelope, and with his father Laertes, told them his
various adventures, this time keeping to the truth. A force of Ithacan rebels approached, the
kinsmen of Antinous and other dead suitors, and seeing that Odysseus was outnumbered, the
aged Laertes joined vigorously in the fight, which was going well enough for them until
Athene intervened and imposed a truce. The rebels then brought a combined legal action
against Odysseus, appointing as their judge Neoptolemus, King of the Epirot Islands.
Odysseus agreed to accept his verdict, and Neoptolemus ruled that he should leave his
kingdom and not return until ten years had passed, during which time the heirs of the suitors
were ordered to compensate him for their depredations, with payments made to Telemachus,
now king.
k. Poseidon, however, still remained to be placated; and Odysseus set out on foot, as
Teiresias had instructed, across the mountains of Epirus, carrying an oar over his shoulder.
When he reached Thesprotis, the countryfolk cried: ‘Stranger, why a winnowing-bat in
Springtime?’ He accordingly sacrificed a ram, bull, and boar to Poseidon, and was forgiven.
Since he could not return to Ithaca even yet, he married Callidice, Queen of the Thesprotians,
and commanded her army in a war against the Brygians, under the leadership of Ares; but
Apollo called for a truce. Nine years later, Polypoetes, Odysseus’s son by Callidice,
succeeded to the Thesprotian kingdom, and Odysseus went home to Ithaca, which Penelope
was now ruling in the name of their young son Poliporthis; Telemachus had been banished to
Cephallenia, because an oracle announced: ‘Odysseus, your own son shall kill you!’ At Ithaca,
death came to Odysseus from the sea, as Teiresias had foretold. His son by Circe, Telegonus,
sailing in search of him, raided Ithaca (which he mistook for Corcyra) and Odysseus sallied
out to repel the attack. Telegonus killed him on the seashore, and the fatal weapon was a spear
armed with the spine of a sting-ray. Having spent the required year in exile, Telegonus
married Penelope. Telemachus then married Circe; thus both branches of the family became
closely united.
l. Some deny that Penelope remained faithful to Odysseus. They accuse her of
companying with Amphinomus of Dulichium, or with all the suitors in turn, and say that the
fruit of this union was the monstrous god Pan—at sight of whom Odysseus fled for shame to
Aetolia, after sending Penelope away in disgrace to her father Icarius at Mantinea, where her
tomb is still shown, Others record that she bore Pan to Hermes, and that Odysseus married an
Aetolian princess, the daughter of King Thoas, begot on her his youngest son Leontophonus,
an died in prosperous old age.